Advertisement

The trump presidency 2018 State of the Union Fact-Check Image President Trump at The State of the Union on Tuesday night. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times

Reporters from The New York Times checked the facts, falsehoods and statements in need of context from President Trump’s first State of the Union address. Watch a replay along with real time analysis here, and read an annotated transcript of the speech.

economy

“Since the election, we have created 2.4 million new jobs, including 200,000 new jobs in manufacturing alone.”

The math is correct, but context matters.

The economy has added about 169,000 jobs a month since the 2016 election, but that is somewhat less than the 185,000 jobs per month that the economy added over the previous seven years.

— Binyamin Appelbaum

economy

“African-American unemployment stands at the lowest rate ever recorded.”

True, but needs context.

It’s true that the black unemployment rate in December, 6.8 percent, was the lowest recorded, but that is also the culmination of a longer-term trend. Moreover, it’s an open question how much credit a president, especially in his first year, can take for the economy.

— Linda Qiu

economy

“After years of wage stagnation, we are finally seeing rising wages.”

False.

Wages are, in fact, rising — but at a slower rate than they were at the end of President Obama’s second term.

— Jim Tankersley

health care

“We eliminated an especially cruel tax that fell mostly on Americans making less than $50,000 a year — forcing them to pay tremendous penalties simply because they couldn’t afford government-ordered health plans. We repealed the core of disastrous Obamacare — the individual mandate is now gone.’’

True, but needs context.

In the newly passed tax law, Congress eliminated penalties for people who go without health insurance, starting in 2019. An estimated 4.5 percent of taxpayers paid the penalty in 2015, and nearly 60 percent of those who did earned less than $50,000 in 2015 — though the Kaiser Family Foundation found that a sizable amount of low-income Americans paying the penalty could find coverage for less.

People could, in many cases, obtain exemptions from the penalties that were indeed a major element of the Affordable Care Act. Other elements of the health care law remain intact.

— Robert Pear

economy

“Apple has just announced its plans to invest a total of $350 billion in America, and hire another 20,000 workers.”

This needs context.

The technology giant Apple did, indeed, say after the tax cut passed that it would “invest” $350 billion domestically over the next five years. But at least $275 billion of that was simply continuing the company’s past spending trends. The actual amount of new investment appears to be roughly $37 billion.

— Jim Tankersley

Video President Trump claimed to have eliminated more regulations within the past year than any previous administration. He also promised an embrace of "beautiful, clean coal."

economy

“Many car companies are now building and expanding plants in the United States — something we have not seen for decades.”

This is an exaggeration.

Yes, some car companies have announced new or expanded plants under Trump, but that’s hardly new or unseen “for decades.” Toyota, for example, opened a plant in Mississippi in 2011.

There has been no surge in automotive employment under his tenure — it’s actually down from a year ago.

— Jim Tankersley

health care

“Last year, the F.D.A. approved more new and generic drugs and medical devices than ever before in our history.’’

True.

The Food and Drug Administration approved 1,027 generic drugs in the 2017 fiscal year, the highest annual total in the agency’s history. Scott Gottlieb, the F.D.A. commissioner, also said that the agency approved 95 novel medical devices last year, another record.

— Robert Pear

energy

“We have ended the war on American energy — and we have ended the war on beautiful, clean coal. We are now very proudly an exporter of energy to the world.”

This is misleading.

Over all, the United States is a net energy importer, although it is projected to be a net energy exporter sometime in the 2020s.

A government analysis found that the United States became a net exporter of natural gas in 2017 for the first time since 1957, and it remains a net exporter of coal. But it is still a net importer of oil.

While it is accurate that Mr. Trump has ordered the Environmental Protection Agency to roll back regulations on the burning of coal, it has done almost nothing to revive the industry, which, economists note, was already in decline because of competition from cheaper sources like natural gas.

— Coral Davenport

economy

“Chrysler is moving a major plant from Mexico to Michigan.”

Sort of.

Chrysler announced that it would move production of heavy-duty pickup trucks from Saltillo, Mexico, to a plant in Michigan. But a truck plant in Saltillo will remain open and be “repurposed to produce future commercial vehicles for global distribution,” according to the automaker. Other plants in Mexico will also continue operations.

— Linda Qiu

health care

“One of my greatest priorities is to reduce the price of prescription drugs. In many other countries, these drugs cost far less than what we pay in the United States, and it’s very, very unfair.’’

True.

Prices for brand-name prescription drugs are typically higher in the United States than in other developed countries, which regulate prices or set them through negotiations with drug manufacturers. Drug makers have strenuously opposed regulation of prices in this country. Cancer drugs and other new medicines sometimes enter the U.S. market with prices exceeding $50,000 a year. And a handful of companies have driven up the prices of some decades-old drugs whose patents expired years ago.

— Robert Pear

infrastructure

“We built the Empire State Building in just one year — isn’t it a disgrace that it can now take 10 years just to get a permit approved for a simple road?”

Partially true, and needs context.

The Empire State Building was built in just over a year. But construction time shouldn’t be compared with the time needed to get a permit (the design for the Empire State Building changed at least 15 times during planning and construction). The requirements for construction and permits are also different between roads and buildings, two different pieces of infrastructure.

Mr. Trump is also overstating the process for building roads. While some bigger projects can take around 10 years to receive permits, small projects, like repaving a road, can take little to no time at all. Average wait times have ranged from three to six years over the past two decades, according to the Federal Highway Administration.

— Emily Cochrane

Video President Trump laid out his plan for changes for family-based immigration to a smattering of boos and hisses.

immigration

“The second pillar fully secures the border. That means building a wall on the Southern border, and it means hiring more heroes like C.J. to keep our communities safe.”

The wall’s impact is unclear.

Homeland Security officials say a border wall would slow the influx of illegal immigrants and drug smugglers and help Border Patrol agents stop them. But it, alone, would not fully stop immigration or the flow of drugs; nor would it make the border fully secure. A majority of border crossings occurred in places where fencing or walls already exist. Just 30 percent of known illegal entries took place in areas without border fencing.

— Ron Nixon

immigration

“The third pillar ends the visa lottery — a program that randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill, merit or the safety of our people.”

False.

The visa lottery program provides 50,000 immigrant visas to people from countries with low immigration rates to the United States.

An 18-page guide from the State Department says applicants must have a high school education or two years of work experience in the past five years that requires “two years of training or experience.”

The applicant must undergo a medical exam and cannot have a criminal record. Visa winners are then subjected to a lengthy background check that can last for months.

— Ron Nixon

immigration

“Under the current broken system, a single immigrant can bring in virtually unlimited numbers of distant relatives.”

This claim is misleading.

Immigrants who obtain green cards or citizenship can petition to bring in their relatives. But that doesn’t automatically allow entry into the United States. Anyone applying for residency must undergo national security and criminal background checks.

The federal government also places annual caps on the number of immigrants’ married children and adult siblings who can sponsor for a visa. The system is badly backlogged; as of Nov. 1, more than 3.9 million people were waiting in line. Some siblings of immigrants who in 2004 petitioned for a visa to come to the United States were just this month starting to have their claims processed.

— Ron Nixon

national security

“The coalition to defeat ISIS has liberated almost 100 percent of the territory once held by these killers in Iraq and Syria.”

True, but needs context.

Mr. Trump is correct that the Islamic State has been forced from most of its previously held territory — 98 percent — in Iraq and Syria. But he is reaping the advantage of a strategy begun in the Obama administration.

American-led forces had already wrested more than 13,000 square miles of territory from the group by the time Mr. Trump was elected in November 2016. Things accelerated after he gave American commanders more authority to order airstrikes and make battlefield decisions. But the defeat of the caliphate does not mean the end of the Islamic State, or ISIS, as a movement or ideology.

— Helene Cooper and Eric Schmitt

Image Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times

economy

“The stock market has smashed one record after another.”

True.

The United States stock market has indeed surged since Mr. Trump took office, with the S. & P. 500 stock index rising 24.7 percent and notching a series of record highs. By comparison, the same index was up 26.3 percent at the same point during President Barack Obama’s administration in 2009 and early 2010.

Back then, level of the stock market was significantly lower, reflecting the impact of the financial crisis in the United States and the deep recession that followed. Under Mr. Obama, stocks continued to recover and also notched a series of record highs, starting in 2013.

— Matt Phillips

trade

“America has also finally turned the page on decades of unfair trade deals that sacrificed our prosperity and shipped away our companies, our jobs, and our nation’s wealth.”

This needs context.

Economists say the loss of manufacturing jobs has more to do with automation and globalization than specific trade deals.

Research suggests that the North American Free Trade Agreement has had a negligible effect on American jobs. And China’s entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001 seems to have had a more pronounced impact on factory jobs. While Mr. Trump has abandoned the trans-Pacific Partnership, negotiations to revamp Nafta are ongoing.

— Natalie Kitroeff

economy

“Since we passed tax cuts, roughly three million workers have already gotten tax cut bonuses — many of them thousands of dollars per worker.”

True.

The statistic comes from a list of tax-related corporate announcements compiled by Americans for Tax Reform, an enthusiastic booster of Mr. Trump’s tax cuts. His wording is carefully phrased. Mr. Trump notes “many” of the announced bonuses amount to thousands of dollars, a number that is vague enough to be defensible. (He also could have said “many of them hundreds of dollars per worker” and been correct, as well.)

— Jim Tankersley

READ MORE: The Times is tracking companies that have made announcements about bonuses and other employment benefits because of the tax law.

taxes

“We enacted the biggest tax cuts and reform in American history.”

False.

Mr. Trump won’t stop making this claim, even though zero evidence supports it. Tax cuts signed by President Ronald Reagan were larger as a share of the economy and in terms of their effects on federal revenues. The recently passed tax bill appears to rank 12th in American history, as a share of the economy.

— Jim Tankersley

The Democratic Rebuttal

Image Without uttering the president’s name, Representative Joseph P. Kennedy III chastised the Trump administration Tuesday night. Credit Brian Snyder/Reuters

Joseph P. Kennedy III delivered the Democratic response to the State of the Union. Below is a fact-check of his remarks.

economy

“Top C.E.O.s making 300 times the average worker is not right.”

True, but misleading.

Mr. Kennedy is most likely referring to a 2014 study from the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute. It said that pay for chief executives at the top 350 American firms were about 300 times more than their employees.

But that sample represents a small fraction of all American businesses, and not a very representative one. According to Bureau of Labor Statistics data, chief executives made an average salary of $194,000 in 2016, about four times what the average worker made.

— Linda Qiu

Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Assessing Trump’s Claims on Immigration, ISIS, the Economy and Taxes





Mr. Cohen’s statement about what he called “a private transaction” was the first time that he had acknowledged a role in the payment, which was first reported in January by The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Cohen said that he had given a similar statement to the Federal Election Commission in response to a complaint filed by the government watchdog group Common Cause, which contended that the payment, made through a limited liability company that Mr. Cohen established, was an in-kind contribution to the Trump campaign.

Photo

Officials with Common Cause also sought to determine whether the payment was made by the Trump Organization or another person.

“The complaint alleges that I somehow violated campaign finance laws by facilitating an excess, in-kind contribution,” Mr. Cohen said in his statement. “The allegations in the complaint are factually unsupported and without legal merit, and my counsel has submitted a response to the F.E.C.”

He said he would not make any additional comments about the commission complaint “or regarding Ms. Clifford.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Cohen was among Mr. Trump’s fiercest defenders during his time at the Trump Organization, often telling reporters during the 2016 presidential campaign that even false information about Mr. Trump could be damaging if printed. Ms. Clifford had told her story to the magazine In Touch in 2011, as well as the gossip website TheDirty.com. Both accounts were published last month after the report of the 2016 payment.

In fall 2016, Ms. Clifford was once again in discussions with news outlets, this time more mainstream. The payment from Mr. Cohen reportedly came a few weeks before Election Day — around the same time as the release of the “Access Hollywood” tape that showed Mr. Trump boasting about grabbing women’s genitals without their consent.

Ms. Clifford has not publicly denied an affair with Mr. Trump. A statement released by Mr. Cohen in her name in January denied an affair, but in interviews, she has refused to directly answer questions about it.

She is one of at least two women who claimed to have had affairs with Mr. Trump but who were kept silent through legal agreements. The other is Karen McDougal, a former Playboy model. Ms. McDougal sold her story to the company that owns The National Enquirer, but it was not printed, The Journal reported in 2016.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hope Hicks, now the White House communications director, said at the time that the report of an affair was “totally untrue” and that the Trump campaign had “no knowledge” of any payment to Ms. McDougal.But the authors are also the first Trump aides to put their names to stories about the campaign’s internal dynamics and to describe some notorious habits of Mr. Trump’s, like his preferences for lunch: He really did eat a lunch of two Big Macs, two Filet-O-Fish sandwiches and a chocolate shake, which he would call a “malted.”

“Do you think I deserve a malted today? I think I deserve one,” Mr. Trump would say after a hard-charging day of appearances.

He flipped incessantly through cable news, monitoring his coverage. The snacks aboard his private plane included Oreos and chips. He ordered people who sneezed to sit away from him. He ordered people Diet Cokes regardless of whether they actually wanted them, because that is what he drinks.

He spoke in non sequiturs that did not always make sense to the people on the other end of the conversation.

“Corey sat there with a half-smile on his face, not knowing quite how to respond,” the authors wrote about Mr. Lewandowski’s first job interview with Mr. Trump, as the candidate ticked off his fleet of planes and helicopters.

“Corey would come to find in the months and years that followed that Donald Trump’s mind works differently than most,” they wrote. “His thoughts sometimes come out like pieces of a puzzle. It’s only later when you put the pieces together that you realize how much they’re worth.”

Early on, according to the authors, who stitched together their own experiences and glossed over the times when neither was on the campaign, Mr. Trump got key validation from his wife, Melania, for an attack on Senator John McCain — who he suggested was a war hero simply for being captured — because Mr. Trump said he had not helped veterans enough.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And he could be brutal to his underlings.

“The mode that he switches to when things aren’t going his way can feel like an all-out assault,” Mr. Lewandowski and Mr. Bossie wrote about Mr. Trump’s notorious outbursts. Those moments pass quickly, they wrote, but can be disorienting. “Being the target of his wrath can make for a pretty jarring experience.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

When Reince Priebus, then the chairman of the Republican National Committee, told Mr. Trump the same weekend the “Access Hollywood” tape was made public by The Washington Post that he needed to consider dropping out of the race, Mr. Trump replied, “If the Republican Party is going to run away from me, then I will take you all down with me.”

Two longer-serving aides with whom Mr. Lewandowski feuded, Roger J. Stone Jr. and Sam Nunberg, are marginalized.

While many have given Mr. Stone, Mr. Trump’s longest-serving adviser, the credit for bringing women who had accused Bill Clinton of sexual misconduct to the second debate, a stunt that clearly rattled Hillary Clinton, the authors attributed the idea to Stephen K. Bannon, who was by then the campaign chief executive.

Other former colleagues came in for warmer treatment, particularly Mr. Bannon, who is described as helping correct a ship that Mr. Manafort had driven toward trouble.

Kellyanne Conway was shown repeatedly trying to make Mr. Trump understand how his words could be offensive to women, particularly talking about the weight of Alicia Machado, the Miss Universe pageant entrant who became a flash point at the end of the campaign.

Then there are aspects of Mr. Trump that will sound wholly unfamiliar to most people who have worked with him. In one passage, the authors wrote that Mr. Trump — whose advisers always privately say he does not read books — loves “Memory, Dreams, Reflections,” by Carl Jung, the Swiss psychoanalyst.

And then there are things that Mr. Trump said that he has tried to paper over with the passage of time.

The authors said that as part of his preparation, for example, he learned what he needed to know from the questions he was asked in interviews with news outlets.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And when he hired Mr. Lewandowski, who was recommended to him at the beginning of the campaign, Mr. Trump described his chances of winning as 10 percent. In another passage, right after winning, the authors described Mr. Trump marveling that he got into the race essentially to have some fun.

Neither anecdote is consistent with Mr. Trump’s insistence that he always knew he was going to win. But the authors observed that the former casino owner makes his own rules, and plays by them.

“The house always wins,” they wrote.It was not clear whether Ms. Pirro was planning to use the book she already has in the works, tentatively titled “Liars, Leakers and Liberals,” as a vehicle. That book is due out June 12 from Center Street, an imprint of the publishing giant Hachette.

Ms. Pirro, in a statement on Saturday provided by Fox News, said: “My upcoming book is not a direct response to ‘Fire and Fury.’ The title on Amazon always has been and continues to be ‘Liars, Leakers and Liberals’ and I plan to cover all of them.”

Photo

But inside the White House, Ms. Pirro is believed to have pitched her book to Mr. Trump as a plum opportunity to present a counterpoint to Mr. Wolff. And she has broadly discussed with friends the idea of a book to rebut “Fire and Fury.”

White House aides declined to comment.

Ms. Pirro, a former Westchester County district attorney, has not been shy about her newfound proximity to power. On Wednesday, she tweeted a photograph of herself standing by the White House gates.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Guess where I am?” she wrote.

Ms. Pirro, who shares Mr. Trump’s love of showmanship, has publicly denounced the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, and the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. She delivered a fiery monologue in December on her weekend Fox News program, “Justice With Judge Jeanine,” in which she called for F.B.I. and Justice Department officials “to be taken out in cuffs.”

But she has pressed her case in private, too, including at an Oval Office meeting with the president in November during which she castigated Mr. Sessions and accused the former F.B.I. director James B. Comey of Mafia-style behavior. (The president’s chief of staff, John F. Kelly, interrupted Ms. Pirro and told her that she was not “helping things.”)

Ms. Pirro’s book will have to compete in a crowded Trump publishing marketplace.

Sean Spicer, the former White House press secretary, is releasing an account of his rocky tenure, “The Briefing,” in July. “Under Fire: Reporting From the Front Lines of the Trump White House,” by the Washington correspondent April D. Ryan, is due in September. Mr. Comey’s memoir, “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies and Leadership,” will be released in April.

A spokeswoman for Hachette did not respond to an inquiry on Saturday. On its website, the publishing house describes “Liars, Leakers and Liberals” as “Judge Jeanine’s no-holds-barred answer to fake news.” A promotional page says that Ms. Pirro plans to interview Ivanka Trump, the president’s daughter and adviser, and to defend Mr. Trump against the news media, which “has twisted his words to fit the narrative they’ve created.”

Center Street, Ms. Pirro’s imprint, is a popular platform for conservatives and allies of Mr. Trump. It published “Let Trump Be Trump,” by the Trump loyalists Corey Lewandowski and David Bossie, last year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In March, Center Street will release “Understanding Trump,” an account of the president by Newt Gingrich that includes a foreword by the president’s son Eric. The book features an endorsement on its cover from Ms. Pirro’s colleague at Fox News, Sean Hannity, who calls it “inspiring and informative.”He accompanied Mr. Trump to the White House and became his chief strategist. With an office in the West Wing and a direct line to the Oval Office — he initially reported to no one but the president — he seemed well positioned to wreak havoc on the political institutions and leaders he railed against as corrupt and self-serving.

But after repeatedly clashing with Ivanka Trump, the president’s eldest daughter, and Jared Kushner, her husband and Mr. Trump’s senior adviser, Mr. Bannon was pushed out after less than eight months with the administration. Five months later, a clash with another Trump — Mr. Bannon called Donald Trump Jr.’s meeting with Russians last year at Trump Tower in Manhattan “treasonous” — cost him another job.

No one has been more closely identified with the Breitbart website or had more to do with emboldening its defiant editorial spirit than Mr. Bannon did after its namesake, Andrew Breitbart, died of a heart attack in 2012. In Washington, Mr. Bannon works and lives part time in a townhouse nicknamed the Breitbart Embassy.

In the statement announcing his move, Mr. Bannon said that he was “proud of what the Breitbart team has accomplished in so short a period of time in building out a world-class news platform.”

Once outside the administration and free to pursue his political enemies, Mr. Bannon set out on an audacious mission to challenge Republican incumbents he deemed insufficiently loyal to Mr. Trump’s agenda. He vowed to replace Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, and started backing far-right candidates, some with questionable backgrounds and losing track records at the polls.

His full-throated, unfailing support of Roy S. Moore in Alabama, even after allegations surfaced that the former judge preyed on girls as young as 14, ended in an embarrassing setback: The state sent a Democrat to the Senate for the first time in a generation.

Several people with knowledge of the dynamics at Breitbart said that Mr. Bannon had lost the confidence of executives and writers who had been fiercely loyal to him as he helped transform the website from a scrappy start-up to one of the biggest and most antagonistic megaphones on the right.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But that confidence faded in recent days and weeks as they came to believe he displayed serious lapses in judgment, according to interviews with half a dozen people close to the situation. Some associates and friends described Mr. Bannon as being detached from reality, unable or unwilling to grasp the severity of his falling out with the White House and its potential effect on Breitbart as a business.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

His situation at Breitbart grew untenable, said one person close to the situation, in part because Ms. Mercer, whose family finances conservative causes with their hedge fund wealth, became concerned that she could face legal exposure. She feared that some of the website’s cheerleading coverage of populist conservative campaigns — like the Senate race in Alabama — could be construed as corporate contributions to those candidates, which are barred under federal election law.

Numerous people who have worked with Mr. Bannon over the past few months said that his attitude lately had grown more imperious and aloof than normal. And his outward lack of any emotion about his messy public breach with the president and the Mercer family struck some not as the calloused indifference of a political operative but as nihilistic.

When Mr. Trump first denounced Mr. Bannon last week, saying, “He not only lost his job, he lost his mind,” Mr. Bannon insisted to his writers and editors at Breitbart that it would all blow over. When reports began circulating that Ms. Mercer had cut him off, he denied it outright. And when friends started asking him about rumors that his job was in jeopardy, he insisted that everything was fine. “The Mercers haven’t given me money in years,” he told multiple people, playing down their significance in his work and insisting that an initial $10 million investment in the website was all they had provided.

In fact, recent tax filings suggest how difficult it will be for Mr. Bannon to fill the void left by the Mercers. The Mercer Family Foundation has donated more than $100 million over the past decade to mostly conservative nonprofit groups, including nearly $6 million to one that Mr. Bannon helped found, the Government Accountability Institute, which has also sought to distance itself from Mr. Bannon in recent days.

Mr. Bannon refused to admit any missteps or lapses in judgment, people close to him said.

Despite putting his name on a statement in which he expressed regret — but did not apologize — for his comments about Mr. Trump’s son, he resisted uttering any words of contrition until an unusual statement on Sunday morning.

While Mr. Bannon edited and approved the version that ultimately became public, an associate sent out the statement without his knowledge, according to three people familiar with the situation. And when he learned that it had been given to Axios, a website read by Washington insiders, he was furious and blamed his colleagues for overreacting, these people said.

Envisioning Breitbart without Mr. Bannon — or Mr. Bannon without Breitbart — was almost inconceivable a month ago. Inside the townhouse called the Breitbart Embassy on Capitol Hill, where photographs of Mr. Breitbart still hang on the wall and half-filled coffee mugs emblazoned with the website’s block “B” logo clutter the kitchen, Mr. Bannon’s presence is just as prevalent.

Upon entering, visitors see a table stacked with copies of the Time magazine from last year with Mr. Bannon on the cover under the headline “The Great Manipulator,” along with other articles that have chronicled his rise to national prominence. On one ground-floor wall is a picture of a honey badger, the animal Mr. Bannon has claimed as his mascot because of its savage and relentless pursuit of prey.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Friends of both Ms. Mercer and Mr. Bannon have described their rupture like “a bad divorce.” But Ms. Mercer was just one person among a growing list of powerful onetime allies whose backing Mr. Bannon had lost in recent months. In addition to disparaging Mr. Bannon as “Sloppy Steve” and calling into question his relevance during the 2016 presidential campaign, Mr. Trump blessed moves by the White House to further ostracize Mr. Bannon. And in the words of one associate of the president’s, he wanted “a scorched earth approach.” Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, took the unusual step last week of suggesting that Breitbart remove Mr. Bannon.

Over the weekend, the White House dispatched Mr. Trump’s allies on Capitol Hill and key members of the administration to the Sunday talk show circuit to defend the president and attack Mr. Bannon’s credibility. The most vocal was Stephen Miller, who worked closely with Mr. Bannon in the White House and was someone Mr. Bannon considered a protégé. Mr. Miller appeared Sunday on CNN and declared Mr. Bannon’s comments in the book by the journalist Michael Wolff “grotesque” as he played down the significance of Mr. Bannon’s role in the administration.

Mr. Bannon’s expression of regret did little to soothe the anger at the White House. Asked on Monday whether the statement, in which Mr. Bannon said Donald Trump Jr. was “a patriot,” had changed anything, the deputy White House press secretary, Hogan Gidley, balked.

“I don’t believe there’s any way back for Mr. Bannon at this point,” he said.Undeterred, Henry Holt and Co., the publisher, announced that instead it would make the book available for sale starting at 9 a.m. Friday rather than wait for its original release date on Tuesday. “We see ‘Fire and Fury’ as an extraordinary contribution to our national discourse, and are proceeding with the publication of the book,” the company said in a statement.

The book infuriated Mr. Trump in part by quoting Mr. Bannon making derogatory comments about the president’s children. Mr. Bannon was quoted as saying that Donald Trump Jr. had been “treasonous” and “unpatriotic” for meeting with Russians during the 2016 campaign and that Ivanka Trump was “dumb as a brick.” Mr. Trump fired back on Wednesday, saying that Mr. Bannon had “lost his mind” and had “nothing to do with me or my presidency.”

Mr. Bannon, who had stayed in touch with Mr. Trump sporadically after being pushed out of the White House last summer, sought to smooth over the rift during his Breitbart News radio show on Wednesday night.

When a caller said that Mr. Trump had “made a huge mistake, Steve, bashing you like he did,” Mr. Bannon brushed it aside. “The president of the United States is a great man,” Mr. Bannon said. “You know I support him day in and day out, whether going through the country giving the ‘Trump Miracle’ speech or on the show or on the website.”

The president cited those comments on Thursday morning when asked by reporters if Mr. Bannon had betrayed him. “I don’t know,” Mr. Trump said. “He called me a great man last night so, you know, he obviously changed his tune pretty quick.”

Although he responded to Mr. Bannon’s flattery, that did not mean Mr. Trump was ready to forgive, as his late-night tweet made clear. About a half-hour later, Donald Trump Jr. seized on his father’s new nickname for the famously rumpled and often unshaven Mr. Bannon in his own tweet. “I have a feeling #SloppySteve is going to go big,” Donald Jr. wrote. “Branding gold.”

Mr. Trump’s spokeswoman earlier in the day made clear that the president wanted Mr. Bannon punished for his disloyalty. Asked at her daily briefing whether Breitbart News should fire Mr. Bannon, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary said, “I certainly think that it’s something they should look at and consider.”

Through a long career in real estate and entertainment, Mr. Trump has repeatedly threatened lawsuits against authors, journalists and others who angered him, but often has not followed through, including after such a threat against The New York Times during the 2016 presidential campaign, and it was unclear whether he would in this case, either.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Wolff did not reply to a request for comment, but after his publisher moved up the release, he jabbed at Mr. Trump on Twitter. “Here we go,” he wrote. “You can buy it (and read it) tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. President.”

Most presidents have avoided legal confrontations over unflattering publications out of fear of giving them more publicity and promoting sales, but it is not unprecedented. Former President Jimmy Carter, shortly after leaving the White House, threatened to sue The Washington Post over a gossip column item asserting that his administration had bugged Blair House, the government guest quarters, while Nancy and Ronald Reagan stayed there before the 1981 inauguration. The Post retracted the item and Mr. Carter dropped the matter.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Trump’s threat generated a debate among advocates and legal scholars. “The president’s attempt to halt publication of a book because of its content is flagrantly unconstitutional,” said Suzanne Nossel, the executive director of PEN America, a group that defends free expression around the world.

The bar for any legal action by a president, the most public of public figures, is particularly high. “At the center of any libel case has got to be an actual statement of fact that’s alleged to be inaccurate and damaging,” said Bruce W. Sanford, a veteran media law specialist at BakerHostetler. “You can’t just say we don’t like this book and all the things in it and sue for libel. That’s not what libel cases are about.”

The book, which quickly shot up to No. 1 on Amazon’s best-seller list after articles about it on Wednesday, presents Mr. Trump as an unengaged candidate and president who grew bored when an aide tried to explain the Constitution to him and refuses to read even one-page briefing papers.

Advisers are reported to have called the president an “idiot,” a “dope” or “dumb” as dirt, and Melania Trump is described as being so unhappy about the prospect of life in the White House that she was in tears on election night. Mrs. Trump has disputed the characterization, and spokesmen for Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin; Gary D. Cohn, the national economics adviser; and Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, the national security adviser, all denied the disparaging quotes attributed to them.

Charles J. Harder, the president’s lawyer, has represented Mrs. Trump and other high-profile figures in cases against the news media. Based in Beverly Hills, Calif., he won Hulk Hogan’s landmark invasion-of-privacy case against Gawker Media and until recently represented Harvey Weinstein, the Hollywood mogul. Mr. Harder threatened to sue The New York Times over an article documenting sexual harassment by Mr. Weinstein. But Mr. Harder no longer represents Mr. Weinstein, and no lawsuit has been filed.

In his letter to Mr. Wolff and his publisher, Mr. Harder said the book itself admits “that it contains untrue statements.” In an author’s note, Mr. Wolff writes that many of the accounts that he collected “are in conflict with one another; many, in Trumpian fashion, are baldly untrue.” He said he sometimes “let the players offer their versions, in turn allowing the reader to judge them,” and in other instances “settled on a version of events I believe to be true.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Harder argued that that proves actual malice and reckless disregard for the truth, standards that courts use to judge whether a public person has been libeled. Mr. Harder cited no specific statements that he judged untrue.

But some people cited in the book have disputed episodes describing them. Former Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain denied suggesting to Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, that British intelligence might have spied on Mr. Trump’s campaign. “This story, as we have pointed out, is a complete fabrication,” he told BBC Radio 4. “I mean literally, from beginning to end. I’ve never had such conversations, in the White House, outside the White House, with Jared Kushner, with anybody else.”

Asked on Thursday for examples of potentially libelous inaccuracies in the book, Ms. Sanders cited only an anecdote in which Mr. Trump seemed not to recognize the name of former Speaker John A. Boehner, even though he had previously posted on Twitter about the lawmaker.

“There are numerous mistakes,” she said, “but I’m not going to waste my time or the country’s time going page by page, talking about a book that’s complete fantasy and just full of tabloid gossip.”After the interview, Democrats on the committee accused the White House of exerting influence over Mr. Bannon to keep him from expounding about his time in the West Wing. A senior administration official insisted that the White House had not told Mr. Bannon to exert executive privilege. Mr. Bannon did not address reporters, and a spokesman for Mr. Mueller did not respond to messages seeking comment.

Mr. Mueller issued the subpoena after Mr. Bannon was quoted in a new book criticizing Mr. Trump, saying that Donald Trump Jr.’s 2016 meeting with Russians was “treasonous” and predicting that the special counsel investigation would ultimately center on money laundering.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Breaking News Emails Get the latest on the special counsel investigation — and other major news — delivered to your email inbox. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

After excerpts from the book, “Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House,” were published this month, Mr. Trump derided Mr. Bannon publicly and threatened to sue him for defamation. Mr. Bannon was soon ousted as the executive chairman of the hard-right website Breitbart News.

Some legal experts said the subpoena could be a sign that the investigation was intensifying, while others said it might simply be a negotiating tactic to persuade Mr. Bannon to cooperate with the investigation. The experts also said it could be a signal to Mr. Bannon, who has tried to publicly patch up his falling-out with the president, that despite Mr. Trump’s legal threats, Mr. Bannon must be completely forthcoming with investigators.

Prosecutors generally prefer to interview witnesses before a grand jury when they believe they have information that the witnesses do not know, or when they think they might catch the witnesses in a lie. It is much easier for a witness to stop the questioning or sidestep questions in an interview than during grand jury testimony, which is transcribed, and witnesses are required to answer every question.

“By forcing someone to testify through a subpoena, you are providing the witness with cover because they can say, ‘I had no choice — I had to go in and testify about everything I knew,’” said Solomon L. Wisenberg, a prosecutor for the independent counsel that investigated Bill Clinton when he was president.

Significant grand jury activity may undermine the case that White House officials have made for months: that they believe the inquiry is coming to an end and are convinced that the president will be cleared. Mr. Mueller has told Mr. Trump’s lawyers that he will probably want to question the president before the investigation concludes, but no interview has been scheduled.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Bannon has limited firsthand knowledge about two key issues within Mr. Mueller’s purview — the president’s firing of James B. Comey as F.B.I. director, a decision made without Mr. Bannon present, and the drafting of a misleading statement about the subject of the June 2016 meeting with Russians, in which they promised damaging information about Hillary Clinton.

But even Mr. Bannon’s secondhand knowledge could be used to draw a contrast with statements from people with firsthand knowledge whom Mr. Mueller has already interviewed. And Mr. Bannon was directly involved in a number of other major moments, including the decision-making around the firing of Michael T. Flynn, the president’s first national security adviser, who was dismissed after he lied to Vice President Mike Pence about phone calls with the Russian ambassador during the presidential transition.

Mr. Bannon also helped run the transition after Chris Christie, now the former governor of New Jersey, was fired as head of that team. And he was the chief executive of the Trump campaign in October 2016 when WikiLeaks began releasing thousands of stolen personal emails from the hacked account of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman, John D. Podesta.

Video

In “Fire and Fury,” Mr. Bannon was quoted by the author, Michael Wolff, as suggesting that Donald Trump Jr.; the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner; and Paul Manafort, his campaign chairman at the time, were “treasonous” and “unpatriotic” for attending the meeting with Russians at Trump Tower. Mr. Bannon said he believed there was “zero” chance that the younger Mr. Trump did not take them to meet his father, who has said he knew nothing about the meeting.

“The three senior guys in the campaign thought it was a good idea to meet with a foreign government inside Trump Tower in the conference room on the 25th floor — with no lawyers,” Mr. Bannon said in the book.

Mr. Trump erupted in anger after the excerpts were published, calling Mr. Bannon “Sloppy Steve” on Twitter and saying he had “cried when he got fired and begged for his job.”

“Now Sloppy Steve has been dumped like a dog by almost everyone,” Mr. Trump wrote. “Too bad!”

Days after the excerpts were published, a statement was issued in Mr. Bannon’s name in which he tried to back away from his assertions in the book. He said that his reference to treason was aimed at Mr. Manafort, not the president’s son. Mr. Bannon did not apologize, however, and though he had approved the statement, an associate sent it to reporters without his knowledge.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The president appeared to ease his anger toward Mr. Bannon at the end of last week. When asked in an interview with The Wall Street Journal whether his break with Mr. Bannon was “permanent,” the president replied, “I don’t know what the word ‘permanent’ means.”

People close to Mr. Bannon took the president’s comments as a signal that Mr. Trump was aware that his fired strategist would soon be contacted by investigators.

Mr. Trump has a history of reaching out to people he has fired, including those under investigation, directly or indirectly, as he did with Mr. Flynn after he was dismissed and before he struck a plea deal with Mr. Mueller’s investigators.

Mr. Bannon has hired William A. Burck of the Washington office of the Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan law firm to represent him in the defamation threats from Mr. Trump and the congressional inquiries. Mr. Burck also represents several current and former administration officials who have been interviewed as witnesses by Mr. Mueller’s investigators. Among them are the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, and the former White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus.“If Trump is openly breaking with him, that dramatically lowers his capital,” said Dan K. Eberhart, an Arizona oil investor and Republican donor who has spoken to Mr. Bannon about his plans to build an antiestablishment political operation. “He is a strategic thinker, and a lot of the things he said make sense, but this stuff from the book — I’m not going to defend that.”

Mr. Bannon has never been bashful about his ambitions — or his belief in his ability to bounce back. When he was fired from his position as Mr. Trump’s chief strategist in the White House in August amid an uproar over Mr. Trump’s less-than-full condemnation of a white supremacist rally in Charlottesville, Va., Mr. Bannon predicted that he would become even more influential on the outside.

Mr. Bannon proclaimed that he would stage a revolt against Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, recruiting primary race challengers who could defeat incumbent Republican senators and remove Mr. McConnell from his post. But building and sustaining costly infrastructure is difficult, especially for antiestablishment crusades like the one envisioned by Mr. Bannon, who in a speech at a September rally for Roy S. Moore, the Alabama Senate candidate, warned the Republican establishment and its donors that “your day of reckoning is coming.”

As significant, Mr. Trump, loyal to only a party of one and hungry for legislative success, was never committed to aiding a coup against congressional Republicans. Indeed, Mr. Trump effectively sided with the party establishment by helping to orchestrate his former aide’s political banishment, making Mr. Bannon the fall guy for an embarrassing string of political setbacks, most notably Mr. Moore’s defeat.

His associates said he was planning a political nonprofit group called Citizens of the American Republic that would spend between $25 million and $30 million — though some advisers predicted a budget as large as $100 million — to seed the primary campaigns. Half the budget was slated to be spent on voter mobilization efforts on the ground in targeted districts for months leading up to elections, with the other half going toward advertising, according to people familiar with the plan. While Mr. Bannon publicly bashed the Republican donor class, he spent months quietly courting some of the deepest pockets on the right.

Mr. Bannon discussed his plans in grandiose, but vague, terms in a series of meetings with donors, including the Las Vegas casino magnate Sheldon G. Adelson; a Chicago Cubs owner, Todd Ricketts; and a Home Depot founder, Bernard Marcus.

While Mr. Bannon boasted that he was turning donors against Mr. McConnell, some of the donors who talked to Mr. Bannon say he appeared to lack the organization to effectively raise and spend their money. For instance, they said Mr. Bannon did not have staff follow up to collect donations after meetings — a common step in political fund-raising. Other donors, they said, resented that word of their conversations with Mr. Bannon seemed to leak to the news media in what they regarded as a presumptuous effort to use them to exaggerate his support.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After reports of Mr. Bannon’s meetings with Mr. Adelson, a representative for the Las Vegas billionaire, Andy Abboud, issued a rare statement pledging loyalty to Mr. McConnell and declaring, “The Adelsons will not be supporting Steve Bannon’s efforts.” Mr. Abboud added, “For anyone to infer anything otherwise is wrong.”

The loss of the Mercer family’s support will be particularly hard for Mr. Bannon to overcome. The Mercers began drifting from Mr. Bannon months ago amid concerns about how the controversy he was generating was affecting the family, according to family associates. The Mercers were upset further when they learned that Mr. Bannon had privately boasted that they would back him if he ran for president, according to one family associate.

The family has pumped tens of millions of dollars into businesses and groups that formed the platform from which Mr. Bannon has waged his populist antiestablishment crusade. Besides their share of Breitbart, they are invested in the political data firm Cambridge Analytica, where Mr. Bannon sat on the board, and the investigative nonprofit group Government Accountability Institute, which Mr. Bannon co-founded.

Photo

In 2015, the institute produced an investigative book called “Clinton Cash” that damaged Hillary Clinton’s then-nascent presidential campaign. And later that year, the institute quietly assembled a research dossier on Mr. Trump’s ties to organized crime-linked figures in the United States and Russia, which it shopped to multiple news media outlets. At the time, the Mercers were supporting the campaign of Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas. An institute spokesman said that Mr. Bannon had nothing to do with that research, and noted that the group did similar research on other candidates, including Mr. Cruz.

After Mr. Trump vanquished Mr. Cruz, the Mercers threw their support — and $2 million in “super PAC” donations — to Mr. Trump and eventually urged him to hire Mr. Bannon.

But there were repercussions to the Mercers’ support for Mr. Bannon and Breitbart News, which at times allied with white nationalists and other fringe slices of the conservative base. Liberals stepped up pressure last year on institutional investors such as university endowments, foundations and pension funds to withdraw their money from Renaissance Technologies, the $50 billion hedge fund at which Mr. Mercer was a top executive.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Amid that pressure, Mr. Mercer announced his plans to step down from the helm of Renaissance in a November letter that sought to create distance between himself and Mr. Bannon. “I make my own decisions with respect to whom I support politically,” he wrote. “Those decisions do not always align with Mr. Bannon’s.”

Ms. Mercer privately blamed Mr. Bannon for at least part of her father’s predicament and declared that she was permanently severing political ties with Mr. Bannon, according to multiple associates with whom she discussed the matter. Her family cut off funding for Mr. Bannon’s personal protective detail, one associate added.

The Government Accountability Institute distanced itself from Mr. Bannon, who reports suggested was working with the institute on a “Clinton Cash”-style investigation of Mr. McConnell and the political establishment. An institute spokesman stressed that Mr. Bannon has had no affiliation with the institute since Ms. Mercer replaced him as chairman last year when he joined the Trump campaign.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Doug Deason, a major Republican donor and supporter of Mr. Trump, said Mr. Bannon and the Mercers in many ways were a good match, but that Mr. Bannon undermined the potential effect of the partnership.

“They were attracted to him because he’s so brilliant and he’s had some great ideas, but the problem is that he’s got this huge, huge ego — bigger than Donald Trump — and it gets in the way of his success.”

Mr. Deason and Mr. Eberhart both said that the passage of tax overhaul legislation by the Republican Congress made them less likely to support Republican primary challenges like those Mr. Bannon has championed.

Mr. Bannon had a momentary victory on that front in September when Mr. Moore easily won the Republican nomination in Alabama, overcoming the opposition of Mr. Trump and Mr. McConnell. And he crowed when Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Bob Corker of Tennessee, both of whom have harshly criticized Mr. Trump, said they would not run again in 2018.

Yet Mr. Moore’s nomination did not inspire a field of insurgents to enter 2018 races, and now it is not clear where Mr. Bannon will be able to claim an electoral scalp. After Mr. Trump’s broadside on Thursday, a number of his preferred candidates found themselves under pressure to denounce Mr. Bannon and some, including former Representative Michael Grimm of New York, did just that.

Another of his candidates, Danny Tarkanian, who is challenging Senator Dean Heller of Nevada, did not rule out eventually appearing with Mr. Bannon but distanced himself from the strategist. “I got in the race before I met or talked to or had any relationship with Steve Bannon,” Mr. Tarkanian said. “I got in the race because of my support for President Trump’s ‘America First’ policies.”

While Mr. Bannon won a wealth of news media coverage for his threats, veteran Republicans were mystified about his strategy of unseating incumbent senators: only eight Republican-held seats are up for grabs in November, hardly the sort of critical mass needed to oust Mr. McConnell.

Just as puzzling was when Mr. Bannon indicated he would target Trump loyalists and reliable conservatives such as Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, even floating the prospect of Erik Prince, a former Blackwater executive, as a potential challenger in the state.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“If you drilled down into it, it was fantasyland given what the Senate landscape look liked,” said Brian J. Walsh, a Republican strategist, of Mr. Bannon’s attempted insurrection.

And Mr. Bannon effectively limited his ambitions by declaring a truce with most House Republicans, even though his politics are more at odds with those of Speaker Paul D. Ryan than Mr. McConnell, and largely ignoring governor’s races.

Mr. Bannon declined to comment on Thursday.

But late Wednesday night on his radio program, he sounded contrite, betraying none of the defiance and bluster that has landed him on the president’s enemy’s list. He reassured listeners that he stood solidly behind Mr. Trump. “The president of the United States is a great man,” Mr. Bannon told one caller.Cheering the breakup on Wednesday were establishment Republicans who resent Mr. Bannon’s bomb-throwing style and his vows to wage war on incumbent lawmakers in the party primaries this year. Senate Republicans could barely contain their glee as they redistributed Mr. Trump’s statement blasting Mr. Bannon with the note “in case you missed it” and a smiling face symbol. By afternoon, candidates whom Mr. Bannon has endorsed in a handful of races faced pressure to disavow his remarks about the president’s son.

At the White House on Wednesday morning, aides who had kept a watchful eye on Mr. Bannon’s efforts to make himself a kingmaker saw an opening to finally rid themselves of him. They encouraged the president to hit back publicly, and Mr. Trump went through at least three drafts of a statement with his communications director, Hope Hicks, and other aides before sending out a final version unlike any issued by a president against a top adviser in modern times.

“Steve pretends to be at war with the media, which he calls the opposition party, yet he spent his time at the White House leaking false information to the media to make himself seem far more important than he was,” Mr. Trump said in the statement. “It is the only thing he does well. Steve was rarely in a one-on-one meeting with me and only pretends to have had influence to fool a few people with no access and no clue, whom he helped write phony books.”

A private lawyer representing Mr. Trump sent Mr. Bannon a letter on Wednesday directing him to cease and desist making derogatory comments about the president and his family and threatening a defamation lawsuit. “Legal action is imminent,” said the letter, first reported by ABC News and confirmed by a person close to the president.

Mr. Bannon declined to comment on Wednesday. But people close to him said that he believed that the president would eventually come around because Mr. Trump would need help with his base at a moment when his political muscle appeared to be on the wane. Mr. Bannon’s Breitbart site reported the contretemps but did not return fire against Mr. Trump on Wednesday.

The president was responding to comments attributed to Mr. Bannon in a new book, “Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House,” by Michael Wolff. The book, due out next Tuesday, was obtained by The Guardian, which first reported Mr. Bannon’s remarks, and New York magazine then posted an excerpt. A copy of the book was later obtained by The New York Times.

In the book, Mr. Bannon was quoted suggesting that Donald Trump Jr.; Jared Kushner, his brother-in-law; and Paul Manafort, then the campaign chairman, had been “treasonous” and “unpatriotic” for meeting with Russians after being promised incriminating information on Hillary Clinton during a June 2016 meeting at Trump Tower in Manhattan.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The three senior guys in the campaign thought it was a good idea to meet with a foreign government inside Trump Tower in the conference room on the 25th floor — with no lawyers. They didn’t have any lawyers,” Mr. Bannon said after The Times revealed the meeting in July 2017, according to Mr. Wolff’s book.

Read Trump’s Reaction to Steve Bannon’s Comments

“Even if you thought that this was not treasonous, or unpatriotic, or bad shit, and I happen to think it’s all of that, you should have called the F.B.I. immediately,” Mr. Bannon continued, according to the book.

He also said that the chance that Donald Trump Jr. did not introduce the Russians to his father “is zero,” a supposition rather than an assertion but one that would contradict the president’s insistence that he knew nothing about the meeting at the time.

According to Mr. Wolff, Mr. Bannon also predicted that a special counsel investigation into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election and any coordination with Trump aides would ultimately center on money laundering, an assessment that could lend credibility to an investigation the president has repeatedly called a witch hunt. “They’re going to crack Don Jr. like an egg on national TV,” Mr. Bannon was quoted as saying.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Donald Trump Jr. did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But he jabbed at Mr. Bannon on Twitter on Wednesday when he reposted a message noting that Alabama now had a Democratic senator. “Thanks Steve,” the younger Mr. Trump wrote. “Keep up the great work.”

The president and his advisers blamed Mr. Bannon for backing Roy S. Moore for the Republican nomination in Alabama and then pressing Mr. Trump into endorsing Mr. Moore even after he was accused of sexual misconduct with several women and girls as young as 14. Mr. Moore ended up losing last month, embarrassing Mr. Trump and souring his already complicated and strained relationship with Mr. Bannon.

Mr. Trump grew more upset about an interview Mr. Bannon gave to Vanity Fair that criticized Mr. Kushner’s contacts with Russians. During his Christmas break in Florida, Mr. Trump stewed and consulted with aides and relatives, according to advisers, but ultimately opted against responding publicly to avoid drawing more attention to Mr. Bannon’s remarks.

But accusing the president’s eldest son of treason crossed the line. “Going after the president’s son in an absolutely outrageous and unprecedented way is probably not the best way to curry favor with anybody,” said Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary.

The book presents Mr. Trump as an ill-informed and thoroughly unserious candidate and president, engaged mainly in satisfying his own ego and presiding over a dysfunctional White House. It reports that early in the 2016 campaign, one aide, Sam Nunberg, was sent to explain the Constitution to the candidate. “I got as far as the Fourth Amendment,” it quotes Mr. Nunberg as saying, “before his finger is pulling down on his lip and his eyes are rolling back in his head.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The book cites an email from an unnamed White House aide offering a harsh assessment of Mr. Trump’s operation that was said to reflect the view of Gary D. Cohn, the president’s national economics adviser: “It’s worse than you can imagine. An idiot surrounded by clowns. Trump won’t read anything — not one-page memos, not the brief policy papers; nothing. He gets up halfway through meetings with world leaders because he is bored.”

The book also asserts that Mr. Cohn and other advisers and associates of Mr. Trump deride him in private, calling him an “idiot,” a “dope” or “dumb” as dirt. Thomas J. Barrack, a friend and adviser to Mr. Trump, was quoted telling a friend that the president is “not only crazy, he’s stupid.”

Reached by telephone on Wednesday, Mr. Barrack said that account was “totally false.” Mr. Barrack added, “It’s clear to anyone who knows me that those aren’t my words and inconsistent with anything I’ve ever said.” He said that Mr. Wolff never ran that quotation by him to ask whether it was accurate.

A longtime media columnist and author, Mr. Wolff brings a high profile, vivid writing style and years of experience but sometimes mixed reviews to the task of chronicling Mr. Trump’s White House. Interview subjects have complained in the past that he took comments meant to be off the record and used them. In a 2004 profile, the journalist Michelle Cottle wrote that “the scenes in his columns aren’t recreated so much as created — springing from Wolff’s imagination rather than from actual knowledge of events.”

Mr. Wolff clearly benefited from close cooperation from Mr. Bannon and the book is infused with his views. The author was frequently seen in Mr. Bannon’s office while he was still working in the White House. According to Ms. Sanders, Mr. Wolff spoke with the president just once, for five to seven minutes, in the first month of the administration, when Mr. Trump called Mr. Wolff to thank him for his criticism of a Times article that the president did not like.

Going beyond the president’s pushback on Mr. Bannon, Ms. Sanders attacked the book as a whole, hoping to discredit its reporting. Ms. Sanders released a statement calling it “trashy tabloid fiction” that is “filled with false and misleading accounts from individuals who have no access or influence with the White House.”

Mr. Wolff, responding by email, said he was “wholly comfortable with my numerous sources.”The president’s engagement on the issue is likely to fuel the long-simmering argument about his state of mind that has roiled the political and psychiatric worlds and thrust the country into uncharted territory. Democrats in Congress have introduced legislation to force the president to submit to psychological evaluation. Mental health professionals have signed a petition calling for his removal from office. Others call armchair diagnoses a dangerous precedent or even a cover for partisan attacks.

In the past week alone, a new book resurfaced previously reported concerns among the president’s own advisers about his fitness for office, the question of his mental state came up at two White House briefings and the secretary of state was asked if Mr. Trump was mentally fit. After the president boasted that his “nuclear button” was bigger than Kim Jong-un’s in North Korea, Richard W. Painter, a former adviser to President George W. Bush, described the claim as proof that Mr. Trump is “psychologically unfit” and should have his powers transferred to Vice President Mike Pence under the Constitution’s 25th Amendment.

Mr. Trump’s self-absorption, impulsiveness, lack of empathy, obsessive focus on slights, tenuous grasp of facts and penchant for sometimes far-fetched conspiracy theories have generated endless op-ed columns, magazine articles, books, professional panel discussions and cable television speculation.

“The level of concern by the public is now enormous,” said Bandy X. Lee, a forensic psychiatrist at Yale School of Medicine and editor of “The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump: 27 Psychiatrists and Mental Health Experts Assess a President,” a book released last fall. “They’re telling us to speak more loudly and clearly and not to stop until something is done because they are terrified.”

As Politico reported, Dr. Lee was invited to Capitol Hill last month to meet with about a dozen members of Congress to discuss the matter. But all but one of the lawmakers she briefed are Democrats. While some Republicans have raised concerns, they do so mostly in private. Others scoff at the question, dismissing it as outrageous character assassination.

Few questions irritate White House aides more than inquiries about the president’s mental well-being, and they argue that Mr. Trump’s opponents are trying to use those questions to achieve what they could not at the ballot box.

“This shouldn’t be dignified with a response,” said Kellyanne Conway, the White House counselor.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The partisans on Capitol Hill consulting with psychologists should reorient their spare time: support the president’s positive agenda of middle class tax cuts, rebuilding infrastructure and the military, investing in our work force,” Ms. Conway said later in an email. “The never-ending attempt to nullify an election is tiresome; if they were truly ‘worried about the country,’ they’d get to work to help it.”

Thomas J. Barrack, a friend of Mr. Trump’s, was quoted in Michael Wolff’s new book, “Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House,” as telling a friend that the president was “not only crazy but stupid.” In interviews, Mr. Barrack denied that and insisted that many people miss Mr. Trump’s actual brilliance.

“Potus has learned over time that Socratic testing and a lack of predictability is a worthy weapon in both negotiations and in keeping his team well honed, unentitled and on alert,” he said, using the initials for president of the United States. “He has no truck with political correctness, self-promotion or personal hubris of his team. This may cause him to appear at times to be overly realistic, blunt or to be politically insensitive even to his own subordinates. However, that is not the case.”

Still, in private, advisers to the president have at times expressed concerns. In private conversations over the last year, people who were new to Mr. Trump in the White House, which was most of the West Wing staff, have tried to process the president’s speaking style, his temper, his disinterest in formal briefings, his obsession with physical appearances and his concern about the theatrics and excitement of his job.

In conversations with friends, Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, has said Mr. Trump is “crazy but he’s a genius.” Other advisers speak about the president as a volatile personality who has to be managed carefully. While Mr. Wolff’s book generated enormous attention, news accounts over the past year have reported the president’s mood swings and unpredictable behavior.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The questions have prompted a sharp debate among mental health professionals about the so-called Goldwater rule adopted by the American Psychiatric Association barring members from evaluating anyone they have not personally examined, a rule generated in response to questions raised about Senator Barry Goldwater, the Republican presidential nominee in 1964.

Mr. Trump is due for his annual physical examination on Friday, but the White House would not say whether it would include mental acuity tests. Some psychiatrists have said it is irresponsible to throw around medical terms without an examination.

“These amateurs shouldn’t be diagnosing at a distance, and they don’t know what they’re talking about,” said Allen Frances, a former psychiatry department chairman at Duke University School of Medicine who helped develop the profession’s diagnostic standards for mental disorders.

Dr. Frances, author of “Twilight of American Sanity: A Psychiatrist Analyzes the Age of Trump,” said the president’s bad behavior should not be blamed on mental illness. “He is definitely unstable,” Dr. Frances said. “He is definitely impulsive. He is world-class narcissistic not just for our day but for the ages. You can’t say enough about how incompetent and unqualified he is to be leader of the free world. But that does not make him mentally ill.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Questions about presidential psychology are not new but have largely been shrouded in secrecy until now. Abraham Lincoln suffered from depression. John F. Kennedy secretly took prescription medicines to treat anxiety. Aides to Lyndon B. Johnson were so troubled that they sought out three psychiatrists, who concluded that his behavior could indicate paranoid disintegration.

Richard M. Nixon took Valium, and during his final days advisers took precautions intended to avoid any rash orders for military action. Late in his tenure, Ronald Reagan’s aides, concerned enough about his mental state, discussed whether to invoke the 25th Amendment. Only years later was Mr. Reagan diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease.

While Mr. Trump cited Mr. Reagan’s case in his tweet, the discussion of his capacity was far more restrained in public back then. Reporters who covered him, like Ann Compton of ABC News and Peter Maer of CBS News, said they knew he was a visibly aging, sometimes hazy man who struggled with facts. But there was less direct public questioning of his mental health until his final year in office with publication of a book disclosing the aides’ 25th Amendment debate.

Public discussion of mental issues has long been a political liability. Senator Thomas F. Eagleton withdrew as the Democrats’ vice-presidential candidate in 1972 after revelations that he had undergone electric shock therapy. Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic presidential nominee in 1988, was forced to release records to dispute rumors that he had received psychiatric treatment. Bill Clinton’s aides were grilled on whether he was being treated for sex addiction.

Mr. Trump’s capacity has been discussed openly since the 2016 campaign. Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, then a rival for the nomination, called him a “delusional narcissist.” Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, another Republican candidate, said: “I think he’s a kook. I think he’s crazy. I think he’s unfit for office.”

But fewer Republicans are willing to say that now that Mr. Trump is in office. Indeed, Mr. Graham in November chided the news media for trying “to label the guy some kind of kook not fit to be president,” even though he had said the exact same thing a year earlier.

One exception has been Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, who said Mr. Trump had yet to “demonstrate the stability” required of a president.

For his part, Mr. Trump has accused his critics of being mentally impaired. He regularly describes adversaries with words like “crazy,” “psycho” and “nut job.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But the discussion has now reached a point where Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who has been reported to have privately called Mr. Trump a “moron,” was asked to weigh in during an interview with CNN on Friday. “I’ve never questioned his mental fitness,” Mr. Tillerson said. “I have no reason to question his mental fitness.”

Democrats, however, say they do. Fifty-seven House Democrats have sponsored a bill to form an oversight commission on presidential capacity. The 25th Amendment, ratified in 1967, permits a president’s powers to be transferred to the vice president when the vice president and a majority of the cabinet or a body created by Congress conclude that the president is incapable of performing his duties. Congress has never created such a body.

Representative Jamie Raskin, a freshman Democrat from Maryland who drafted the legislation, said it was time for Congress to do so. He said his concern was as much about cognitive issues, citing the president’s occasional slurred speech and inability to form complete sentences.

“The 25th Amendment was passed in the nuclear age, and we have to keep faith with its central premise, which is there is a difference between capacity in a president and incapacity,” said Mr. Raskin. “We haven’t been forced to look at that question seriously before and now we are.”The America First groups have been viewed as something of an enigma in campaign finance circles. While many of the Republican Party’s traditional elite donors have publicly kept their distance from the groups, the organizations have the blessing of the administration and have projected confidence in their fund-raising.

But Republican operatives have grumbled that the amount the groups say they have raised have dwarfed the amount they have spent to support Mr. Trump’s political and policy goals during his first year in office.

Reports filed with the election commission show that the groups combined to spend about $3.2 million — just over 10 percent of what they raised — supporting Republican candidates in special elections, including former Senator Luther Strange and Roy S. Moore, who lost their bids for an Alabama Senate seat, and Karen Handel, who won her House campaign in Georgia.

Figures provided by a Republican ad buyer indicate that the groups spent an additional $2.8 million on television ads promoting efforts championed by Mr. Trump to overhaul the tax code and repeal the Affordable Care Act, though there were no records of television ad spending by the groups since the passage last month of the tax overhaul. Other Republican groups have been advertising heavily this year to bolster public approval of the tax overhaul, which is considered critical to the party’s midterm election prospects this year.

Photo

Brian O. Walsh, the president of America First Policies, said the group had paid for online ads “highlighting President Trump’s leadership on key issues.” Those ads can be harder to track, and Mr. Walsh declined to provide an “item-by-item breakdown at this time.”

A person close to the groups told Axios that they had $14 million in the bank headed into this year, which could provide the basis for a major midterm election campaign.

But very few of the party’s elite donors were listed among the contributors to America First Action in the report filed on Wednesday with the election commission.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

By far the biggest donor was the Los Angeles developer Geoffrey H. Palmer, who donated $2 million of the $3.7 million raised in the second half of the year by America First Action. Mr. Palmer donated generously in 2016, giving $3 million to a different super PAC that supported Mr. Trump, and an additional $310,000 to a committee associated with Mr. Trump’s campaign.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

An additional $1 million came from Murray Energy, a coal company based in Ohio that has assiduously courted Mr. Trump as it pressed the new administration to repeal President Barack Obama’s climate change policies intended to shut down old coal-burning power plants. The company had previously donated a combined $550,000 to help fund the Republican convention in Cleveland and Mr. Trump’s inauguration.

In the weeks after Mr. Trump’s inauguration, Murray’s chief executive officer, Robert E. Murray, wrote confidential memos to Vice President Mike Pence and the energy secretary, Rick Perry, laying out a wish list of environmental rollbacks, which he discussed in a meeting with Mr. Perry. The administration is on track to fulfill many of the items on Mr. Murray’s list.

Murray Energy’s donation to America First Action came about five months after Mr. Murray’s meeting with Mr. Perry. Asked whether there was any connection between the donation and the administration’s receptiveness to Mr. Murray, Gary M. Broadbent, a spokesman for Murray Energy, said that “President Trump and his administration have always supported the United States coal industry.”

America First Action has spent heavily to try to court other major donors, as well, paying consultants with significant fund-raising experience, including Cara Mason, the former finance director of the Republican National Committee, and Marty Obst, a longtime aide and current policy adviser to Mr. Pence. Their respective firms were paid $60,000 each in the second half of last year by America First Action.

The super PAC hosted a Christmas party for donors at the Trump International Hotel, which has emerged as a go-to destination for donors and others seeking to rub elbows with Trump family members and insiders. The party was attended by Mr. Pence, as well as Trump family members and several members of Congress. In addition, America First Action spent more than $57,000 on gifts for donors at upscale jewelry stores, the White House Historical Association and 800-CEO-READ, a company that sells bulk orders of books about business, including many of Mr. Trump’s titles.

The super PAC also paid $55,000 to a firm owned by Mr. Lewandowski, $40,000 to one owned by Ms. Pierson and $137,000 to one owned by Mr. Parscale. He is in charge of digital outreach for America First Action and Mr. Trump’s campaign, and it is possible that his firm is using the money it received from the PAC to buy digital advertising. Mr. Clarke, who is a spokesman and senior adviser to America First, was paid $32,000 through his firm.Calling Mr. Manafort “a seasoned campaign professional with experience and knowledge of how the Russians operate,” Mr. Bannon wrote that Mr. Manafort “should have known they are duplicitous, cunning and not our friends.”

Mr. Bannon is not known for second-guessing himself and views apologies as signs of weakness. Nowhere in his statement on Sunday did he actually say he was sorry. But the turn of events represented a stunning reversal of fortune for a man who once operated with such autonomy in the White House that, as chief strategist, he reported only to the president himself. And he reiterated his allegiance in his statement, saying, “My support is also unwavering for the president and his agenda.”

While the attack on Mr. Bannon may have prompted an unusual expression of contrition from him, the collective force of the attempts to defend the president also ensured that the questions about his mental fitness raised in the book will continue to command attention. This comes as Mr. Trump enters a critical period needing to pass legislation like a spending measure to keep the government open.

The president returned to the White House on Sunday from Camp David, where he had held meetings with Republican leaders in Congress, cabinet officials and senior staff members to set priorities for the year. After an initial message on Twitter that focused on policy matters like border security, the opioid epidemic, infrastructure and the status of young undocumented immigrants, Mr. Trump joined the offensive against the book and the news media coverage of it.

“I’ve had to put up with the Fake News from the first day I announced that I would be running for President,” he wrote on Twitter. “Now I have to put up with a Fake Book, written by a totally discredited author.”

Mr. Bannon has been the target of derision by the president, who has labeled him “Sloppy Steve” and has said he played a far lesser role in Mr. Trump’s political rise than he has been given credit for. Even out of favor, Mr. Bannon has said he remains a champion of the president’s agenda.

But Mr. Miller, the president’s senior policy adviser, acidly criticized Mr. Bannon in an interview on CNN, calling his comments in the book “out of touch with reality,” “vindictive” and “grotesque.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a week that held one indignity after another for Mr. Bannon, who has fancied himself a revolutionary poised to tear down the Republican establishment, the words of Mr. Miller may have cut the deepest.

Mr. Miller became a Bannon protégé of sorts during the time Mr. Miller worked for Attorney General Jeff Sessions when Mr. Sessions was in the Senate. He became one of the leading voices on the right calling for tighter controls on legal and illegal immigration.



The two men shared not just a nationalist-tinged conservative view on policy but a desire for political provocation. Mr. Bannon and Mr. Trump were delighted by and cheered on some of Mr. Miller’s more infamous and combative episodes with the news media, like when he chastised a CNN reporter for displaying “cosmopolitan bias” in his understanding of the White House’s immigration positions.

Mr. Miller, however, bristled at the suggestion that he was a Bannon creation, a perception Mr. Bannon himself often encouraged.

Mr. Bannon’s allies understood the White House’s moves this past week to be an act of ruthless political war much like Mr. Bannon himself might have waged during his time in the administration.

They said they believed that the president and senior aides like Kellyanne Conway, who is close to Rebekah Mercer, the billionaire who issued a rare statement last week disavowing Mr. Bannon, were sending activists and donors a clear message: He is persona non grata in conservative politics. Ms. Mercer is a partial owner of Breitbart News, the hard-right website where Mr. Bannon is executive chairman but where his future is now in doubt.

Video

On Sunday, it was Mr. Miller who had the political leverage. He cast as false the perception that Mr. Bannon had ever played a Svengali-like role in the presidential campaign and the White House.

He said Mr. Bannon’s role had been “greatly exaggerated,” even as the CNN host Jake Tapper ticked off a long list of policies he said Mr. Bannon had played a key role in formulating.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In “Fire and Fury,” Mr. Bannon said Mr. Trump had “lost his stuff,” and Mr. Miller also tried on Sunday to counter the concerns about the president’s mental state. Echoing the president’s own words from Saturday, he called Mr. Trump a “political genius” who could rattle off complete paragraphs on the fly in response to news events and then deliver them “flawlessly” to a campaign audience.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The interview, on the program “State of the Union,” quickly grew heated as Mr. Tapper accused Mr. Miller of being “obsequious” and speaking to an “audience of one.” Before it ended, Mr. Tapper told Mr. Miller that he was wasting his audience’s time.

Mr. Tapper then turned to the camera, even as Mr. Miller was still speaking, and cut to a commercial.

A short time later, the president praised his aide on Twitter, saying that Mr. Miller had “destroyed” Mr. Tapper in the interview.

In addition to assailing Mr. Bannon, Mr. Miller sharply criticized Mr. Wolff and his book, saying it “is best understood as a work of very poorly written fiction.”

Mr. Wolff, appearing on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” stood by the accuracy of his book and contradicted the White House account of how often he had talked to the president.

White House officials said their records showed that Mr. Wolff had last talked to the president in February, but Mr. Wolff said he had talked to the president several times after that. In all, Mr. Wolff said, he talked to the president for about three hours, which also included interviews during the campaign.

He said that Mr. Trump had even initially flattered him about the project, and that he had told interview subjects that “the president said he likes this idea” of a book.

Mr. Wolff also repeated an assertion in the book that many in the White House had talked about the possible invocation of the 25th Amendment, a constitutional provision that permits a president’s powers to be transferred to the vice president when the vice president and a majority of the cabinet or a body created by Congress conclude that the president is incapable of performing his duties.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is alarming in every way,” Mr. Wolff said, adding, “This is worse than everybody thought.”

Appearing on Sunday talk shows, others in Mr. Trump’s inner circle dismissed any such worries.

Mike Pompeo, the C.I.A. director, said that he had no concerns about Mr. Trump’s ability to receive and process the kind of intelligence typically presented to presidents, and that Mr. Wolff’s descriptions of Mr. Trump’s mental state were “pure fantasy.”

“I’m with him almost every day,” Mr. Pompeo said on “Fox News Sunday.” “We talk about some of the most serious matters facing America and the world, complex issues. The president is engaged. He understands the complexity. He asks really difficult questions of our team at C.I.A.”

Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who was briefly a rival to Mr. Trump for the Republican nomination and, until recently, had been a frequent critic of the president, joined his defenders on Sunday.

“I’ve enjoyed his company,” he said on “Meet the Press.” “He beat me like a dog. I’ve said everything I know to say about him — I’ve used every adjective on the planet. I lost. He won.”

“I don’t think he’s crazy,” Mr. Graham continued. “I think he’s had a very successful 2017. And I want to help him where I can. And we should all want him to be successful. He’s got a lot on his plate.”

With Republican control of the House and possibly the Senate at risk in 2018, Mr. Trump cannot afford another year dominated by news of West Wing dysfunction.

“The reality is people want the president to deliver, and this is a side show,” said Sam Nunberg, a former aide to the Trump campaign who is now close with Mr. Bannon.

Mr. Nunberg added that the president’s disavowals of his former strategist would mean little to voters. “The irony is the president is going to have a rude awakening when numerous candidates during the midterms respectfully decline his offer to campaign with them,” he said.Many readers and viewers have become numb to the stories after watching them play out in public day in and day out. Twitter has made clear that Mr. Trump veers wildly from subject to subject, fight to fight. Fact checkers have made clear that he has a strained relationship with the truth.

Mr. Bannon is quoted in the book saying things that other advisers have said confidentially for months — that the president is stunningly undisciplined with no patience or interest in learning and driven by intemperate, sometimes absurd motivations. At one point, Mr. Bannon describes Mr. Trump acting “like a 9-year-old,” an observation that has power not because it was unique to those who worked for the president but because it is now on the record in Mr. Bannon’s name.

The phenomenon is so universal that it is a wonder any White House is surprised anymore when someone who sat in the next chair during staff meetings in the Roosevelt Room one day becomes the next day’s featured character in the window of Washington bookstores like Kramerbooks or Politics and Prose.

Indeed, Mr. Trump, of all presidents, should know what to expect given his predilection for making employees sign nondisclosure agreements, a practice he brought from the private sector to his 2016 campaign and the subsequent presidential transition.

Video

But other than security reviews that sometimes limit what a former administration official can write in a book, no one has yet figured out a way to muzzle White House aides from telling their stories after departing the West Wing, either in first person or through authors such as Mr. Wolff.

Jimmy Carter’s chief speechwriter, James Fallows, wrote a trenchant piece in The Atlantic Monthly called “The Passionless Presidency,” portraying his former boss as a good man but an ineffective chief executive. Ronald Reagan’s budget director, David Stockman, wrote a book describing an amiable but inattentive and unsophisticated president whose funny math disguised rising deficits.

Perhaps more vexing for Mr. Reagan was the score-settling memoir of Donald T. Regan, his second chief of staff at the White House who was pushed out during the Iran-contra scandal. Mr. Regan’s revelation that Nancy Reagan had influenced the president’s schedule based on advice from her astrologer infuriated the president. “The media are behaving like kids with a new toy — never mind that there is no truth to it,” Mr. Reagan wrote in his diary.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

There actually was. Just as there was truth to the sometimes unsettling depiction of Bill Clinton’s White House by his former senior adviser, George Stephanopoulos, whose memoir described his disillusionment with a president who recklessly risked his policy agenda for extramarital sex. When that book was released, Mr. Stephanopoulos’s former White House colleagues stayed away from the launch party lest they risk Mr. Clinton’s ire.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Leon E. Panetta may hold a record of some sort by writing two tell-all memoirs of his time in two presidential administrations 43 years apart. The first was a scathing description of his service as a civil rights official under Richard M. Nixon that ended when Mr. Panetta was pushed out. The second was a more respectful but at times unflattering portrayal of his experiences as C.I.A. director and defense secretary for Barack Obama, whom he deemed smart but vacillating and overly cautious.

Other advisers have told their stories to authors, as Mr. Bannon did. Paul O’Neill, who served an unhappy tenure as Mr. Bush’s first Treasury secretary, gave interviews and documents to the author Ron Suskind for a searing account of a White House where tax-cutting, neoconservative ideology pushed aside evidence and contrary views. Mr. Bush, Mr. O’Neill concluded, was “a blind man in a roomful of deaf people.”

Bob Woodward’s many books have benefited enormously from tales of former aides freed from the shackles of service, usually not attributed directly to them but often clear enough to the presidents who read with seething anger.

As aggravated as Mr. Trump may be with Mr. Bannon’s apostasy and Mr. Wolff’s book, he may need to get used to it. Just one year in, Mr. Trump faces many years of books to come.

He may not have to worry much about Sean Spicer, his first White House press secretary who has remained loyal and is now working on a memoir — although to be sure, no one in the Bush White House initially thought they had to worry about the ever-loyal Mr. McClellan either.

Mr. Trump may have more to wonder about with Omarosa Manigault Newman, the veteran of “The Apprentice” who left her White House post noisily last month saying that as the only African-American woman of prominence on Mr. Trump’s team, she had seen things “that have upset me.” She added ominously, “It is a profound story that I know the world will want to hear.”

And then there is James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director fired by Mr. Trump last year and trashed on Twitter ever since. Mr. Comey has a different understanding of the meaning of loyalty than the president does. His book is due out on May 1. Its title: “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies and Leadership.”Screening requests by the White House are commonplace in modern administrations but are generally kept under wraps if the film is shown during presidential downtime. The news that the White House would screen “The Post” was first reported by The Hollywood Reporter.

On Friday, the representative for Fox Movies said that the administration had also secured permission to screen a second movie, “The Greatest Showman,” a musical about P. T. Barnum — a man who, as the film’s website indicates, created a “mesmerizing spectacle that became a worldwide sensation.”

There is no guarantee that the president will be in the room if, when or even where either movie is screened. Mr. Trump, who is described in Mr. Wolff’s book as, among other attributes, having a tiny attention span, has said that he has trouble sitting through movies and knows in the first five minutes whether he will enjoy a film. He will get up and leave if he realizes he will not.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

On Friday afternoon, Mr. Trump’s focus was set to stray briefly from the news media; the president traveled to Camp David to meet with Republican congressional leaders over more pressing matters, which include figuring out how to keep the government running. Mr. Trump has long toyed with the idea of clamping down on the First Amendment, going so far as to suggest at a 2016 campaign rally that he would “open up those libel laws.”

"So when The New York Times writes a hit piece which is a total disgrace,” Mr. Trump told the crowd at the time, “or when The Washington Post, which is there for other reasons, writes a hit piece, we can sue them and win money instead of having no chance of winning because they’re totally protected.”

Indeed, Mr. Trump’s lawyer sent an 11-page letter this week to Mr. Wolff’s publisher, warning that the book might “give rise to claims for libel” that could result in “substantial monetary damages and punitive damages.”

Mr. Trump’s low regard for reporters has not found favor with the stars of “The Post,” who have grown increasingly vocal after the film’s premiere.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Nixon administration accused The Times of violating the Espionage Act, and won a temporary court order in 1971 that blocked the newspaper from publishing more of what became known as the Pentagon Papers. That is when The Washington Post, led by the publisher Katharine Graham, stepped in.

Mr. Hanks, who plays Ben Bradlee, the former editor of The Post, told The Hollywood Reporter in December that he would not attend a White House screening of his own movie.

“This is the moment where, in some ways, our personal choices are going to have to reflect our opinions,” Mr. Hanks said. “We have to start voting, actually, before the election. So, I would probably vote not to go.”

This White House has demonstrated a knack for scheduling movie screenings to match — or clash with — the news cycle it perpetuates: Last January, aides screened “Finding Dory,” about a family’s efforts to reunite, as protests against the administration’s immigration ban roiled the country.Mrs. Trump, who recently traveled with her husband to Florida to meet with two victims of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, was light on details but voiced a willingness to address school safety and the opioid epidemic.

“As a parent, I cannot imagine the kind of grief and tragedy like that brings,” Mrs. Trump told the governors’ spouses, who had gathered in the Blue Room for lunch on Monday.

Many of the students have called for more restrictive gun control measures than Mr. Trump and most congressional Republicans have been willing to endorse. Their push has resulted in tense moments with lawmakers, as when students heatedly questioned Senator Marco Rubio of Florida last week at a forum and one survivor tearfully pleaded with Mr. Trump at the White House last week to ban weapons like the one used in the Parkland shooting.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The East Wing has not unveiled a significant policy initiative, but Mrs. Trump recently hired a policy director who could push any nascent plans forward. In the past, Mrs. Trump has given few clues as to where she may focus her efforts, but she has also publicly expressed interest in helping children affected by the opioid crisis, advocating anti-bullying measures and aiding disaster relief efforts.

On Monday, shortly after reflecting on the Parkland shooting, Mrs. Trump said adults should take responsibility for monitoring children’s behavior on social media.

“As I have said before, it is important that, as adults, we take the lead and the responsibility in helping our children manage the many issues they are facing today,” she said. “This means encouraging positive habits with social media and technology, even limiting time online and understanding the content they are exposed to on a daily basis.”

In recent days, students with connections to the shooting have called for Mrs. Trump to take action on her past remarks about combating cyberbullying. Lauren Hogg, the younger sister of David Hogg, one of the most outspoken of the Parkland students, said her family had received death threats since Mr. Trump’s oldest son, Donald Jr., appeared to endorse a conspiracy theory about her brother on Twitter.

“Hey @FLOTUS you say that your mission as first lady is to stop cyber bullying,” Ms. Hogg wrote, “well then, don’t you think it would have been smart to have a convo with your step-son @DonaldJTrumpJr before he liked a post about a false conspiracy theory which in turn put a target on my back.”

As she closed her speech, Mrs. Trump told members of her audience that the East Wing would reach out in the near future “as we travel the country and work to promote and fight for the well-being of our children.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The White House did not provide details about what those plans would entail.

“It just means that as she is cultivating these relationships with political spouses, she wants to work with them on issues that they all care about — children,” Mrs. Trump’s spokeswoman, Stephanie Grisham, said in an email.Photo

WASHINGTON — Americans are usually eager to see what the first lady will be wearing to the president’s State of the Union address, how she will greet attendees and which guests she has invited to sit near her to watch the speech.

Rarely is there a question about whether she will show up at all.

In the end — spoiler alert — Melania Trump attended President Trump’s first such address on Tuesday night. She entered to a loud round of applause. Fresh from Palm Beach, she sported a tan. She flashed a wide smile.

And, for the record, she wore Dior.

It was a high-profile resurfacing for a notoriously private first lady who in recent weeks has stayed largely out of sight. Her recent absence from public life was said to have been caused, in part, by anger over reports that the porn star Stormy Daniels was paid $130,000 just before the 2016 election to keep quiet about an affair she had had a decade earlier with Mr. Trump.

But Mrs. Trump, unlike other first ladies, did not travel with her husband along the protester-studded route to the speech.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. Trump’s cream pantsuit stood out in a sea of black suits and blue ties. Those trying to read the tea leaves on her choice of dress would have two telling options: Her suit was close to the white color and style chosen last year by women in the Democratic Party, who wore it in a salute to suffragists during Mr. Trump’s first speech to a joint session Congress. (It was also a color favored by his campaign opponent, Hillary Clinton, in public appearances.) More recently, musicians wore white roses to this year’s Grammys in a nod to the “Time’s Up” movement, and others performed in white.Rather than touting the virtues of lowering economic barriers, Mr. Trump will promote the growing American economy and argue for foreign investment.

“The president will continue to promote fair economic competition and will make it clear that there cannot be free and open trade if countries are not held accountable to the rules,” said Gary D. Cohn, his economics adviser. “As the president has said repeatedly, America and his administration supports free and open trade, but it needs to be fair and reciprocal.”

Photo

His message will stand out. In the forum’s opening address on Tuesday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India defended globalization. Later in the day, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada announced that his country and 10 other Pacific Rim nations had concluded talks for a trade pact without the United States.

Scheduled to depart from Washington on Wednesday night, Mr. Trump will stay in Davos just one night and meet with Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, with whom he had testy exchanges over his posting of anti-Muslim videos distributed by a far-right British group, as well as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, with whom he is friendlier. He will also attend a reception of world leaders in his honor and host a dinner for European corporate chieftains.

Seven cabinet secretaries, including Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, are scheduled to attend. Among those who will not come is Melania Trump, who has kept a low profile since a new book reported that she was so wary of life in the White House that she cried on election night and The Wall Street Journal reported that her husband’s lawyer sent $130,000 to a porn actress before the election to keep her from discussing an alleged sexual encounter with Mr. Trump.

Mrs. Trump denied the book’s account and has otherwise largely remained silent. Her spokeswoman, Stephanie Grisham, said on Tuesday that the first lady was not coming to Davos because there were “too many scheduling and logistical issues.”

How Mr. Trump will calibrate his message is the preoccupation of the forum so far. Will he declare victory over the fat cats? Lecture them about trade? Or seek to win them over?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He’s not going to get up to the stage of Davos and insult them,” predicted Anne-Marie Slaughter, the president of New America, a Washington-based research organization, and a former director of policy planning at the State Department under President Barack Obama. “He’s so often a chameleon. He will adapt his message completely to the crowd. What he tweets, on the other hand, is likely to be very different.”

No American president has attended Davos except Bill Clinton, who came in 2000, and many were perplexed that Mr. Trump, who styles himself as a billionaire populist, would choose to.

“It’s so fascinating that he wanted to go,” said Karen Donfried, the president of the German Marshall Fund of the United States, a research group that focuses on trans-Atlantic affairs, and a former national security aide to Mr. Obama. “Maybe he thinks these are his people, the corporate people. But his statements are to the other side.”

Photo

To be sure, many of the American 1-percenters here have Mr. Trump to thank for the substantial corporate and personal tax cuts that he helped push through Congress in December. But privately, they consider him a global wild card and bristle at his efforts to build walls, figuratively and literally, against immigration and free trade.

“Will political and corporate leaders at Davos seek to flatter Trump to get on his good side or give him the cold shoulder given their growing concerns about his leadership?” asked David J. Kramer, a former State Department official under President George W. Bush who just hosted a conference on foreign policy under Mr. Trump at Florida International University.

Mr. Trump, after all, is the president who has taken a wrecking ball to the liberal international order that Davos represents. In his first year in office, he abandoned the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement with Asian nations, threatened to pull out of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada as well as a separate trade pact with South Korea if they are not renegotiated to his liking, threatened a trade war with China and announced that he would withdraw the United States from the Paris climate accord now signed by every other nation in the world.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

He has also offended many by referring to African nations in a meeting with lawmakers as “shithole countries,” or some variation of that, and saying in another meeting that Nigerians who visit the United States would not want to “go back to their huts.” At least 10 heads of state or government from Africa are scheduled to attend this year, and Mr. Trump will meet with President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, the chairman of the African Union.

But Davos participants rarely confront the grievances that globalization has produced in a visceral way, and some analysts said Mr. Trump’s message might be a bracing reminder that the wheeling and dealing has real-world effects on people far below this mountain retreat.

“It’s important for the Davos elite to hear from the populist president who, although a billionaire businessman himself, is better able than they to understand what real people need in the United States and perhaps in other countries as well,” said Peter Van Praagh, the president of the Halifax International Security Forum, another annual gathering.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I hope President Trump brings with him to Davos a message to the business elite and to the political elite of some of the lessons he has learned as a candidate and in his first year in office, which is that making all of these issues real to people is the path to success,” Mr. Van Praagh added. “And although many of the people gathered at Davos intuitively understand this, they probably have a lot to learn from Mr. Trump.”

Whether they will listen is another matter. And whether they will accept the messenger as an authentic envoy from the 99 percent or a wannabe member of the elite still banging on their door remains to be seen.

“These same folks, as well as the business-media elite, generally find Trump to be a troublesome and boorish man,” Mr. D’Antonio said. “They may do what they can to ingratiate themselves, but privately and in some cases publicly they will reject him. He knows this as well as he knew that New York’s social elite rejected him in a similar way.”Photo

WASHINGTON — President Trump attacked his own attorney general on Wednesday, asking in a Twitter post why Jeff Sessions has not been investigating Democrats for Russian interference in the 2016 election.

In his tweet, Mr. Trump revived his offensive on Mr. Sessions, whom he once called “beleaguered,” and continued his days-long Twitter comments on the ongoing special counsel’s investigation into Russian meddling. It was the latest instance of the president publicly criticizing federal law enforcement.

Mr. Trump has been questioning why the Obama administration did not do more to stop Russian interference, and he has said that his administration has been tougher on Russia than that of his predecessor.

“Why aren’t they the subject of the investigation?” Mr. Trump asked. The president regularly uses Twitter to question why the Justice Department is not investigating his political opponents.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Trump has denied that Russia was involved in the 2016 election meddling. But an indictment announced last week against 13 Russians and three companies described a sophisticated, multiyear Russian influence campaign designed to sow discord across the American democratic process. On Tuesday, the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, announced charges against the 19th person in the sprawling probe that has dogged Mr. Trump’s presidency.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Trump does not think Mr. Sessions — one of his earliest supporters — has done enough to protect him from the Russia probe. The president has publicly said he never would have hired Mr. Sessions if he knew the attorney general would recuse himself from the Russia investigation.

The attorney general’s recusal last year was the first in a series of steps that led to Mr. Mueller’s appointment. Mr. Trump had once considered firing Mr. Mueller, but he backed down after the objection of a senior adviser.On Tuesday, Mr. Trump seized on Mr. Obama’s comments, which he made at a Rose Garden news conference a month before the election and which was recycled this week by one of Mr. Trump’s favorite news shows, “Fox & Friends,” as evidence that the former president did not confront allegations of Russian hacking.

“That’s because he thought Crooked Hillary was going to win and he didn’t want to ‘rock the boat,’ ” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. “When I easily won the Electoral College, the whole game changed and the Russian excuse became the narrative of the Dems.”

The White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, insisted that Mr. Trump would not tolerate Russian interference in elections. Such meddling, she said, occurred during the previous administration. Mr. Trump himself tweeted, “I have been much tougher on Russia than Obama, just look at the facts.”

The facts suggest otherwise, which made Mr. Trump’s latest attack on Mr. Obama seem disingenuous. Mr. Trump has dismissed Russia’s interference in the election as a hoax, asserting that it could have been carried out by China, a guy from New Jersey or “somebody sitting on their bed who weighs 400 pounds.” He said that President Vladimir V. Putin denied that Russia was involved and that he was inclined to believe him.

Mr. Trump’s initial response to Mr. Mueller’s indictment was to declare that it exonerated him, since it did not claim that he or Trump campaign officials knowingly met with Russian agents about the social media campaign. But as he spent a three-day weekend mulling the disclosures, the president grew angry, aides said.

On Saturday, Mr. Trump rebuked his national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, for failing to assert, during a visit to a security conference in Munich, that Russia’s interference had no effect on the outcome of the election. He also went after Mr. Obama, declaring, “Obama was President, knew of the threat, and did nothing.”

The next day, he tweeted, “Obama was President up to, and beyond, the 2016 Election. So why didn’t he do something about Russian meddling?”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In fact, Mr. Obama personally issued a warning to Mr. Putin in September not to tamper in the election — a warning the administration repeated a few weeks later. On Oct. 7, his administration formally accused Russia of stealing and leaking emails from the Democratic National Committee and a range of other institutions and individuals.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Obama, his former aides said, had hoped that the announcement, by the director of national intelligence, James R. Clapper Jr., and the Department of Homeland Security, would follow a bipartisan statement by congressional leaders about the need for state and local authorities to guard their voter-registration and balloting machines from Russian hacking.

The White House provided an intelligence briefing to the lawmakers, including Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and the House speaker, and Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the Senate majority leader. But Mr. McConnell, two former officials said, refused to back a statement publicly challenging Russia and told Mr. Obama that he would view an effort by the White House to do that as partisan.

Don Stewart, a spokesman for Mr. McConnell, said that the White House asked him to sign a letter warning about the threat of cyberattacks, and that he did so. But that letter did not name Russia and only spoke generally about the threat to the electoral process.

Other Republican senators faulted the Obama administration on Tuesday for failing to warn officials in 21 states where intelligence agencies had detected efforts by the Russians to probe voting machines that they were at risk of being infiltrated. In some cases, officials in those states were not cleared to be briefed on the intelligence.

“I am very concerned that the Obama administration did so little,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine. She added, referring to the F.B.I. director at the time, “They were aware — the intelligence community leaders were fully aware, whether it was Jim Clapper or James Comey, that the Russians were attempting to interfere in our elections — and they put out that brief statement before the election.”

Senator James Lankford, Republican of Oklahoma, said that even after Mr. Obama formally named Russia, the administration declined to declassify information related to meddling by the Kremlin. “I’m not sure why they continued to sit on that information,” he said.

Some former administration officials said they pushed for the United States to take pre-emptive or deterrent measures against Russia in the summer of 2016. But the White House was reluctant, in part because the intelligence agencies still had not reached a consensus about who was responsible for the hacking. There were also concerns about Russia retaliating and whether the United States should use similar tactics.

Looming over all this was Mr. Obama’s worry that if he spoke out strongly, he would be viewed as trying to tilt the vote.

“He really did feel, in September and October of an election year, as the head of the Democratic Party, that his role in adjudicating the information Americans received should be limited,” Mr. Rhodes said. “If he had ratcheted up that rhetoric, we would have seen exactly what we see today. It would have been called fake news.”European diplomats said there was scope for an agreement on missiles and inspections, but not yet on the length of the deal. They argue that rewriting those terms would break the bargain they struck, not only with Iran but also with Russia and China, two other signatories. And breaching the deal, they say, would free Iran to pursue nuclear weapons again.

The upcoming talks are being led by Brian H. Hook, a low-key Republican lawyer who is the State Department’s director of policy planning, who has said he would bring the European request for a guarantee back to Washington. European diplomats said they worry that Mr. Trump’s scorn for the deal runs so deep that he would find other reasons to pull out. Last month, he warned that the accord “is under continuous review, and our participation can be canceled by me as president at any time.”

Even if Mr. Trump did pledge to abide by the deal, it is far from clear that a successor deal would be endorsed by Russia or China, let alone the Iranians, who signaled in recent weeks that they are planning a new project — a fleet of nuclear-powered ships, fueled by Iranian-made reactors — that they say would justify resuming the production of nuclear fuel as the limits imposed by the deal expire over the next dozen years.

Still, the mere fact that the United States and Europe are trying to work out a compromise attests to the desire, on both sides, to find a solution that would satisfy Mr. Trump while not unraveling the deal.

The president’s national security team — Mr. Tillerson, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster — has on three occasions talked him out of ripping up the deal. With each deadline to reimpose sanctions on Iran, that task gets harder.

There is an element of diplomatic legerdemain to the exercise, European diplomats acknowledge: How do you convince Mr. Trump that you have changed the deal without actually changing it?

“The supplemental deal is a diplomatic device that is being used to allow the Europeans to declare victory,” said Mark Dubowitz, a leading critic of the Iran deal who is nevertheless open to the idea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They can say they were able to keep the deal, remain steadfast to their commitment not to renegotiate it, but also to satisfy the U.S. and their own concerns that the length of the deal was too short,” said Mr. Dubowitz, the chief executive of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies.

By law, Mr. Trump must decide every 120 days whether to continue suspending longstanding American economic sanctions against Tehran, which the United States committed to lift as part of the deal. If he were to reimpose them, as he has threatened, that would effectively scuttle the deal.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Iran complains that Mr. Trump’s threats have already kept European banks from investing in major projects in Iran, denying it the benefits that were promised for giving up its enrichment program.

“If the same policy of confusion and uncertainties over the future of the deal continue,” Iran’s deputy foreign minister, Abbas Araqchi, who was a member of the negotiating team, said last week, “if companies and banks are not working with Iran, we cannot remain in a deal that has no benefit for us.”

The International Atomic Energy Agency said last week that it had received formal notice from Tehran about a “decision that has been taken to construct naval nuclear propulsion in future.”

Nothing in the 2015 agreement prohibits the construction of nuclear reactors to power ships and submarines, and those reactors would almost certainly not use nuclear-weapons-grade fuel. But they could provide a pretext for Iran to resume uranium enrichment.

The Europeans are most comfortable with enforcing new limits on Iran’s intercontinental ballistic missile development and testing. Missiles are not covered by the nuclear accord, but rather by a United Nations resolution, whose wording was negotiated by then-Secretary of State John Kerry just as the nuclear accord was coming together in Vienna in July 2015.

The State Department’s talking points said the United States viewed the nuclear and missile programs as “inseparable,” and said that “Iran’s development and testing of missiles should be subject to severe sanctions.” The Europeans have not gone that far, at least yet.

Inspections are potentially more problematic, given the administration’s rejection of arguments by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps that all military-related sites are off limits to international inspectors.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But this has not been an issue yet: The inspections have been limited to declared nuclear sites, and the United Nations nuclear agency affirmed last week that it had been given all the access it sought. Inspectors have said they would try to inspect military sites only if they had intelligence suggesting that surreptitious nuclear activity was underway.

Once a deal is struck with the Europeans, administration officials intend to seek approval from Russia, China and Iran. But concerns that such a deal could not possibly pass muster with Iran will not deter them, a senior official said. Russia and China’s lack of participation would also matter little, given the stark consequences for Iran’s economy if Europe and the United States reimpose sanctions, this person said.

While American and European negotiators are working feverishly on a deal to preserve the 2015 accord, there are also preliminary discussions about what will happen if they fall short.

Reimposing sanctions, such as blacklisting the Central Bank of Iran, would cause serious problems for European companies, potentially precipitating a split in the trans-Atlantic alliance. But the president, Mr. Dubowitz noted, has the authority to phase in sanctions, which he could use as leverage to give negotiators more time to work out an agreement.

He could, for example, impose sanctions on the central bank for its support of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, which is accused of supporting terrorism, but waive the imposition of so-called secondary sanctions on foreign companies that do business with the bank until the next deadline in July.

For the Europeans, who are mostly satisfied with the deal and face no domestic political pressure to pull out, there is little joy in this exercise. But they feel they have no choice but to go along with it. One diplomat compared it to humoring an angry relative who controlled a family vacation estate, and periodically threatened to burn it down.But officials conceded that some of the searches — particularly those aboard Greyhound buses or Amtrak trains on domestic routes — had increased since the Obama administration. And under President Trump, field supervisors have regained the authority to order the searches, instead of officials at Border Patrol headquarters in Washington.

“The U.S. Border Patrol conducts transportation checks in accordance with the law,” said Stephanie Malin, a spokeswoman for Customs and Border Protection, which oversees the Border Patrol. “Transportation checks are performed when and where there is an operational benefit.”

The agency is an arm of the Homeland Security Department, which would not provide statistics on how often, or where, it checks domestic travel passengers or patrols on private property. But agency data shows that less than 3 percent of foreigners entering the country illegally were caught at immigration checkpoints nowhere near the border.

Many of the searches turned up marijuana and other illegal drugs, according to the data. But the most drugs were seized in small quantities — about an ounce or less — and were taken from American citizens in 40 percent of the cases.

The department said in a statement that the checkpoints were “strategically placed where illegal cross-border smuggling is most likely to converge.”

Stephen I. Vladeck, a professor at the University of Texas School of Law, said the department had occasionally pushed the limits of its authority to conduct searches without a warrant far from the border.

“Inevitably, one of these cases is going to get to the Supreme Court, which will have to revisit the seemingly limitless government authority the department claims it has,” Mr. Vladeck said. “It cannot be the case that anyone who lives or travels within 100 miles of the border has no Fourth Amendment rights.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Fourth Amendment protects against “unreasonable searches and seizures.”

Current federal immigration law does not require the government to obtain a warrant before searching people and their property at ports of entry. Once away from a land or maritime border, but still within what the Justice Department has defined as a “reasonable distance” of 100 miles, officers can search people who are suspected of immigration violations and smuggling drugs.

But many border residents and travelers say that authority amounts to an invasion of privacy.

An estimated 200 million Americans live within 100 miles of the border, according to the A.C.L.U. At least 11 states — mostly in the Northeast and Florida — are either entirely or almost entirely in the 100-mile radius.

A measure to limit that distance to 25 miles passed the Senate in 2013 but was rejected by the House; it was proposed after Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, was stopped by the Border Patrol at an immigration checkpoint.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Race/Related Newsletter Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The legal dispute in Texas challenges the Border Patrol’s authority to search private property without permission. By law, officers can go onto private property within 25 miles of the border without permission from the owner.

Ricardo D. Palacios, the owner of the Juan Salinas Ranch, said in court filings that Border Patrol officers had been “roaming freely about” for years on his property near the small town of Encinal, Tex. He said that the searches were conducted with neither a warrant nor a good reason to be there, and that officers also had stopped his family members at checkpoints.

The last straw, Mr. Palacios said in court documents, came in November, when he found a surveillance camera hidden in a tree near his house.

Mr. Palacios removed the camera and kept it as evidence of federal officers trespassing on his property. Both the Border Patrol and the Texas Department of Public Safety claimed ownership of the camera and have asked Mr. Palacios to return it. State officials have threatened to arrest him on theft charges. Mr. Palacios sued both agencies.

Raul Casso, a lawyer for Mr. Palacios, said the ranch is more than 30 miles from the Rio Grande, which divides the United States and Mexico. He said that put Mr. Palacios’s property beyond the distance that Border Patrol officers can legally patrol without his permission.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They either acted on purpose or incompetently,” said Mr. Casso, a former lawyer for the city of Laredo. “Either way, they are outside the scope of their authority.” Customs and Border Protection officials declined to comment on the case.

In New Hampshire, the A.C.L.U. is defending 18 people who were arrested at immigration checkpoints on a major interstate where Border Patrol officers stopped hundreds of cars about 90 miles from the Canadian border over the summer. Checkpoints on Interstate 93 were common after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, but had abated by July 2012, Border Patrol officials said.

Border Patrol officers detained about 33 people on suspicion of immigration-related offenses at checkpoints in northern New Hampshire in August and September; the local police charged an additional 44 with drug possession. In all, the authorities seized about two pounds of marijuana and smaller amounts of cocaine and other drugs, court records show.

Gilles Bissonnette, the legal director for New Hampshire’s A.C.L.U. chapter, said the Border Patrol violated state law by conducting the drug searches. He said that New Hampshire courts have held that without a warrant, the authorities cannot deploy drug-sniffing dogs in searches — as they were at the checkpoints — without a reasonable suspicion of a crime.

“They were supposed to be conducting immigration checks,” Mr. Bissonnette said. The checkpoints must be brief and limited to confirming resident status, he said, not primarily used for drug searches or general law enforcement efforts.

New Hampshire officials maintain that the Border Patrol officers were in their jurisdiction since the checkpoints were under 100 miles from the Canadian border.

“These are federal agents working for a federal agency performing a federal function within the federation of states,” said Gabriel Nizetic, a lawyer in the state who represented a local police department that participated in the checkpoints. Officials at Customs and Border Protection declined to comment.

But perhaps no Border Patrol searches have generated as much controversy as the immigration inspections of passengers boarding Greyhound buses or Amtrak trains.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In January, officers arrested a Jamaican woman traveling on a bus from Orlando to Miami who had overstayed a tourist visa. That same month, officers in Spokane, Wash., arrested an undocumented immigrant traveling with his son on a Greyhound bus from Seattle to Montana. The man’s son, who was released, is living in the United States under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, an Obama-era initiative that protects young undocumented immigrants from deportation. But the father was charged with being in the country illegally.

Both episodes have prompted widespread outrage. Videos taken by other bus passengers were widely distributed on social media.

“We are talking about purely domestic routes that happen to be within 100 miles of the border,” said Matt Adams, the legal director of the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project in Seattle. He said the government was using the law “to justify racial profiling. There was no reason to think these men were sneaking across the border.”

Homeland security officials deny the charges of racial profiling and maintain their authority to conduct the searches. In a statement, Greyhound said it is required by law to “cooperate with the relevant enforcement agencies if they ask to board our buses or enter stations.”“I’d rather have somebody that loves their students and wants to protect their students than somebody standing outside that doesn’t know anybody, and doesn’t know the students, and frankly, for whatever reason, decided not to go in even though he heard lots of shots being fired inside,” Mr. Trump said, referring to Mr. Peterson. He said the officer “was not a credit to law enforcement.”

Speaking of the gunman in Parkland, Mr. Trump added that if his idea had been in place, “a teacher would have shot the hell out of him before he knew what happened.”

It was the third time in three days that Mr. Trump, who has vowed to take swift action after the latest school shooting, has championed the idea of transforming schools into fortified zones where educators would secretly be carrying weapons to guard against attacks.

Mr. Trump is under pressure to embrace stiffer gun restrictions, including a ban on assault weapons and limits on high-capacity ammunition, despite vehement N.R.A. opposition. The president has instead seized on the idea of loosening gun laws to protect schools.

“Why do we protect our airports and our banks, our government buildings, but not our schools?” Mr. Trump said. “It’s time to make our schools a much harder target for attackers.”

He said declaring schools gun-free zones “puts our students in far more danger.”

Mr. Trump, who was endorsed by the N.R.A. during his campaign and has been an ardent ally, suggested that he was pressuring the gun lobby to accept measures it had deemed objectionable. But the two proposals he mentioned on Friday — improving background checks for gun buyers and ensuring that mentally ill people cannot have access to firearms — are both supported by the group.

Later Friday, Mr. Trump expressed confidence that lawmakers would join forces with him to address the tragedy, particularly on the issue of background checks.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“We’re going to do a lot, but we are going to be very strong on background checks,” Mr. Trump said during a news conference at the White House with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia. “I’ve spoken with many of our people in Congress — our senators, our congressmen and women — and there’s a movement on to get something done.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Democrats were stepping up their calls for more restrictive gun laws, far beyond what Mr. Trump suggested.

“It’s time for Republicans in Congress to show just a shred of the courage of American students,” Representative Ted Deutch, the Democrat who represents Parkland, said in the party’s weekly radio address. “It’s time for Speaker Ryan to let the House vote to require background checks on every sale and transfer, to keep guns out of the hands of suspected terrorists, to outlaw bump stocks that enable automatic rates of fire, to require that no one under the age of 21 can buy a gun, and to once again ban assault weapons from our streets.”

Mr. Trump’s comments on arming teachers were part of a highly partisan speech to the conservative gathering — an annual meeting that draws the hard-right activists who form the backbone of his political coalition — in which the president proclaimed that his first 12 months in office “the most successful first year in the history of the presidency.” He referred to Democrats as “crazed,” and said his opponents had “committed a lot of atrocities.” His remarks were met with rapturous applause.

On a day when his former top campaign aide, Rick Gates, pleaded guilty in the special counsel’s inquiry into Russia’s interference in the 2016 presidential election, Mr. Trump smiled broadly as the crowd chanted “Lock her up!” in a campaign refrain that referred to Hillary Clinton, his Democratic rival. Appearing at ease among some of his most fervent supporters, Mr. Trump returned to his well-worn list of campaign themes — “Don’t worry, you’re getting the wall,” he told the crowd — and even poked fun at his trademark bright-blond pompadour after catching a glimpse of his image on a giant screen in the convention hall.

“Oh, I try like hell to hide that bald spot, folks, I work hard at it,” he said. “It doesn’t look bad. Hey, we are hanging in, we are hanging in, we are hanging in there — right?”

But most of his speech had a harder edge. Mr. Trump outlined his efforts to step up immigration enforcement and crack down on so-called sanctuary cities, those that decline to cooperate with federal immigration authorities to track and remove undocumented immigrants. And he returned to a favorite campaign-trail routine of reciting the lyrics to a song called “The Snake,” about a woman who takes in an ailing snake that recovers and repays her hospitality with a lethal bite — suggesting an analogy between immigrants and a poisonous reptile.

“Think of it in terms of immigration,” Mr. Trump said, before reciting the verses for the cheering audience. When he finished, he said, “And that’s what we’re doing with our country, we’re letting them in.”

Mr. Trump ended the address with a call to action for Republicans, and warned that they must not be complacent about getting out to vote in 2018 and defeating Democrats.

“They want to give your money away, they want to end your tax cuts, they want to do things you wouldn’t believe — including taking your Second Amendment rights away,” Mr. Trump said. “They will do that, so we have to get out there, and we have to fight in ‘18 like never before.”For decades, the N.R.A. has used its sway in Washington to preserve the A.T.F. in its limited capacity. It has aggressively lobbied against nominated directors and pushed Congress to enact restrictions on how the bureau spends money to curtail its ability to regulate firearms and track gun crimes. One funding provision, for example, forbids the A.T.F. from using electronic databases to trace guns to owners. Instead, the agency relies on a warehouse full of paper records.

It is beneficial to the N.R.A. to have a smaller agency like the A.T.F. in charge of gun regulation, one senior bureau official acknowledged, rather than a larger, more politically powerful agency like the F.B.I. that can more effectively demand additional resources from Capitol Hill.

The gun lobby is one of the most potent political forces in Washington, doling out tens of millions of dollars each election cycle to lawmakers and campaigns to steer the political discourse on gun regulation. The N.R.A. reported spending the most amount of money in its history in 2016 working to support Mr. Trump and the Republican Party, and its backing has come under renewed scrutiny in the gun debate that has taken shape in the days since the shooting in Parkland, Fla.

The president, in turn, has courted gun advocates, vowing to defend firearm owners and the N.R.A. In a tweet on Thursday morning, Mr. Trump called the organization “Great People and Great American Patriots.”

The A.T.F. rose to prominence in the Prohibition era with its takedown of Al Capone. In the decades since, its mission has been tailored toward gun violence and trafficking. More recently, the bureau has had its share of troubling episodes. It was infamously involved in the 1993 siege at a Branch Davidian compound in Texas in which 75 peopled were killed, and during the “Fast and Furious” scandal two decades later, the bureau lost guns across the Mexican border, which were later recovered at crime scenes. Agents also used a multimillion-dollar slush fund meant to pay informants to instead pad their own pockets, The New York Times revealed last year.

Photo

Under President Barack Obama, the White House considered eliminating the A.T.F. The proposal, a direct affront to the N.R.A., would have transferred all its law enforcement authorities to the F.B.I., a former senior Obama administration official said. The plan was largely abandoned, however, after the 2012 school shooting in Newtown, Conn.

The N.R.A. opposed the nomination of Andrew Travers, whom Mr. Obama selected to lead the agency in 2010. Mr. Travers was never confirmed. The N.R.A. did not take a position on the agency’s last and only director confirmed by the Senate, B. Todd Jones, who led the A.T.F. from 2011 to 2015.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We support enforcement of the laws on the books and A.T.F. efforts to apprehend and prosecute violent criminals,” said Jennifer Baker, a spokeswoman for the N.R.A. “We have and will continue to oppose political appointees looking to enact an anti-gun agenda through the regulatory process making it more difficult for law abiding citizens to exercise their constitutional rights while criminals continue to break the law.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

An official at the Justice Department said the administration was interviewing potential A.T.F. directors but did not know when that might result in a nomination. The White House has confidence in the acting director, Thomas E. Brandon, the official said, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the matter.

Mr. Brandon, who has served in that capacity since 2015, is thought of highly among the A.T.F. work force, agents said. But even his most ardent supporters acknowledge that a Senate-confirmed director, handpicked by the president, would be better positioned to be an advocate for the agency.

There is no indication that Mr. Brandon will be nominated to permanently lead the bureau.

“A.T.F. works diligently with the resources that we have,” said a bureau spokesman, Joshua Jackson. “And like any agency, we could always use additional resources.”

The A.T.F.’s own 52-page budget proposal for the current fiscal year describes an agency on the cusp of a resource crisis. That document is separate from the White House budget proposed last week, which lays out the administration’s broader priorities for the fiscal year that begins in October.

In describing its own shortages, the A.T.F. says it remains unable to fulfill even basic regulatory responsibilities, including inspections of firearms dealers — something the bureau says presents a “significant risk to public safety.”

The A.T.F. is also bracing for the departure of nearly a fifth of its roughly 2,500 special agents. Of them, 499 are at least 50 years old, according to the budget proposal, and face mandatory retirement at 57.

Last year, 141 agents retired from the A.T.F., Mr. Jackson said, and only 117 were hired. An additional 24 agents left the bureau for other reasons.

Still, as ranks thin, the A.T.F. is being tasked to lead some of the Trump administration’s most lauded violent crime initiatives. A team of agents was sent to Chicago over the summer to help the city combat gun violence, and the bureau is leading crackdowns on the MS-13 criminal gang, which Mr. Trump has vowed to “eradicate.”Advertisement

15 Claims From Donald Trump’s Speech to Conservatives, Fact Checked The president mixed facts and falsehoods while talking about immigration, gun policy, trade, climate, taxes and other topics. Image President Trump speaking on Friday at the Conservative Political Action Conference in Maryland. The sanctions are intended to close a loophole in the effort to cut off North Korea’s imports of oil and exports of coal. Credit Pete Marovich for The New York Times

President Trump addressed a range of policy issues, from tax cuts to gun policy to immigration, at Friday’s annual meeting of the Conservative Political Action Conference. Below is a look at some of the facts and figures he cited that were accurate, false or could use some additional context.

“We have passed massive, biggest in history, tax cuts and reforms … for 45 years nothing has been passed.”

False.

The $1.5 trillion in tax cuts that Mr. Trump signed into law in December are not the largest in history. According a previous analysis in The New York Times, they amount to the 12th largest, as a share of the economy.

Also, Mr. Trump is not the first president in 45 years to enact tax cuts. Tax legislation was signed into law by Presidents Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and Barack Obama. Further, the cuts passed under Mr. Reagan and Mr. Obama were larger, as a share of the economy, than those recently signed by Mr. Trump.

“No president has ever cut so many regulations in their entire term as we have cut in less than a year.”

Evidence is lacking.

Mr. Trump is the first president to label actions taken by federal agencies as deregulatory and regulatory, so it’s a difficult comparison to make. Previous administrations have counted the number of regulations withdrawn from the federal registry. By that metric, Mr. Trump did not eliminate more in one year than his predecessors in their entire terms.

“We have massive energy reserves, we have coal, we have so much. And basically they say you can’t use it.”

This needs context.

Mr. Trump is referring to the Paris climate accord that his administration announced the United States was withdrawing from in June 2017.

Emissions reductions under the agreement are voluntary. So, contrary to Mr. Trump’s claim, coal consumption in the United States would not have necessarily been affected.

“China, their agreement didn’t kick in until 2030. Right. Our agreement kicks in immediately. Russia, they’re allowed to go back into the 1990s, which was not a clean environmental time.”

This needs context.

Under the Obama administration, the United States offered to cut emissions by 26 percent to 28 percent below 2005 levels, by 2025, as part of the Paris agreement.

China ratified the Paris agreement in September 2016. The country pledged to lower emissions after a projected peak level of emissions in 2030. But updated projections anticipate that peak will occur closer to 2020 as the Chinese government invests in renewable energy and halts production on cars that don’t meet fuel efficiency standards.

Russia pledged to cut emissions by 25 to 30 percent below 1990 levels by 2030. That is rated “critically insufficient” by the Climate Action Tracker, which scores countries’ pledges. Russia’s economy had collapsed, causing emissions to drop rapidly, with the fall of the Soviet Union. So reducing emissions from the level reached in 1990 would still be an increase from Russia’s emission levels today.

“Other countries, big countries, India, and others, we had to pay because they considered them a growing country.”

This is misleading.

Mr. Trump is likely referring to the Green Climate Fund, a United Nations program to help poorer countries mitigate the effects of climate change.

The voluntary program has been in place since 2013, and was not mandated under the Paris agreement. The United States pledged $3 billion to the fund, but Mr. Trump halted contributions, with $2 billion still outstanding. Developing countries, including Mexico, Indonesia and Mongolia, also are putting money into the fund.

“Companies are pouring back into this country, pouring back. Not like — when did you hear about car companies coming back into Michigan and coming to Ohio and expanding? You never heard that.”

False.

The Reshoring Initiative is an advocacy group that works with manufacturing companies to return jobs to the United States from overseas. Its website lists dozens of instances when car companies returned manufacturing jobs to the United States over the past decade. For example, Ford announced it would move production of pickup trucks from Mexico to Ohio in 2015, and General Motors said it would build a type of Cadillac in Tennessee instead of Mexico in 2014.

“We declined to certify the terrible one-sided Iran nuclear deal. It was a horrible deal. Whoever heard you give $150 billion to a nation that has no respect for you whatsoever?”

This is misleading.

The Iran nuclear deal released about $100 billion — not $150 billion — in previously frozen Iran assets; the United States did not cut Iran a check. Much of that money is also tied up in debt obligations. For example, $20 billion is owed to China for financing projects in Iran. Estimates for the actual amount available to Iran range from $35 billion to $65 billion.

“You saw Apple just brought $350 billion in.”

Not quite.

Mr. Trump has previously claimed that Apple’s $350 billion investment is the direct result of his tax cuts. But Apple, according to reporting in The Times, “was already on track to spend $275 billion over the next five years. After the $38 billion tax payment is subtracted, that leaves its new investment at roughly $37 billion over the next five years.”

“They’re not giving us their best people, folks. They’re not giving us — use your heads. They’re giving us — it is a lottery.”

There is no evidence to support this.

Mr. Trump is referring to the diversity visa lottery. But foreign governments do not select entrants; rather, millions of individuals enter of their own volition. A computer chooses winners at random and, before receiving a visa, those selected must undergo a screening process that bars criminals and the indigent. In fact, those who have been admitted through the program have higher rates of employment and of finding work in professional or managerial occupations than most other immigrants.

“This guy came in through chain migration. And a part of the lottery system. They say 22 people came in with him.”

There is no evidence to support this.

It is implausible that Sayfullo Saipov, the suspect in the October 2017 truck attack in Manhattan, enabled 22 to immigrate to the United States. He is a green card holder who immigrated to the United States in 2010 from Uzbekistan, married another Uzbek immigrant in 2013 in Ohio and fathered three children in the United States. Under current law, he is not eligible to sponsor any extended family to immigrate to the United States.

“Jobs are at a record level. Jobs are so good. 2.7 million jobs created since the election.”

True.

Mr. Trump’s figure is accurate, but about 600,000 of those jobs were added in the last four months of Mr. Obama’s presidency. About 2.1 million jobs have been added since February 2017, Mr. Trump’s first full month in office.

“African-American unemployment has reached the lowest level in our history.”

It did. But then it climbed back up.

This talking point needs an update. The unemployment rate for black Americans was 6.8 percent in December, the lowest since 1972, but it rose to 7.7 percent in January. It is worth noting that the rate has been in decline for several years and the gap between unemployment rates for white and black Americans remains high.

“Wages are rising for the first time in many, many years.”

False.

Wages have been rising for several years. In fact, wage growth in January 2018 was slower than what it was during the last few months of Mr. Obama’s term, according to data from the Federal Reserve.

“Last year, we had almost a $500 billion trade deficit with China ... we have $100 billion deficit with Mexico.”

Overstated.

In 2016, the United States had a net trade deficit of $309 billion with China, and $63 billion with Mexico.

There is not yet fully available public trade data for 2017. The United States had trade deficits of $375 billion with China and $71 billion with Mexico in goods alone. But the United States usually maintains a surplus in the trade of services with China and Mexico, so it’s likely Mr. Trump’s figures are off by billions of dollars.

“[MS-13] shouldn’t be in our country. They were let in for years, they shouldn’t be. And we’re getting them out.”

This is misleading.

The gang known as MS-13 was formed in Los Angeles by refugees from El Salvador in the 1980s. The government began deporting its members in the mid-1990s, which helped the gang’s leadership grow abroad.

Lisa Friedman contributed reporting.

Linda Qiu is a fact-check reporter, based in Washington. She came to the Times in 2017 from the fact-checking service PolitiFact. @ylindaqiu





The Trump administration has engaged in a sleight of hand to create the 22-1 ratio. And while Mr. Trump has made progress in his deregulatory agenda, his claims of achieving more success in one year than throughout the entire presidencies of any of his predecessors is hyperbole, not fact.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A Newly Invented (And Inflated) 22-1 Ratio

Mr. Trump demanded the so-called “2-for-1 rule” in one of his first executive orders. He claims that it has been so successful that the federal government has actually eliminated 22 regulations for every one enacted.

A White House fact sheet from December declared that the Trump administration had “issued 67 deregulatory actions while imposing only three new regulatory actions.” To back up its claim, the fact sheet cited a chart published by the White House Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs that described each of the actions.

But the chart — which the federal Regulatory Information Service Center says has never been compiled during earlier presidencies — raises more questions than it answers. For example:

■ A database that is maintained by the White House regulatory affairs office outlines 34 “deregulatory” actions, compared to 67 in the chart. The White House did not respond to repeated inquiries to explain the discrepancy. ■ Some items labeled “deregulatory action” clearly involve some regulation as well. For instance, one “deregulatory action” lifts a ban on imports of pitahaya, or dragon fruit, from Ecuador. But it also subjects the imports to new inspections requirements. Other actions are temporary, like the dismissal of a century-old shipping law to help hurricane aid efforts in Puerto Rico. Doing so was labeled a “deregulatory action,” although it only lasted 10 days and Mr. Trump declined to fully or permanently renew it. ■ Not all actions are created equal. Three actions designated as “regulatory” were described as economically significant — meaning that they have an impact of $100 million or more. Only two “deregulatory” actions were considered economically significant. ■ Of the 65 other “deregulatory actions” on the chart, 60 percent were either routine, administrative or otherwise not significant. About one-third of those efforts to roll back regulations began under President Barack Obama. And 10 do not appear to be rules — they are advisory notices or guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget.

“The 22-1 ratio needs to be taken with a grain of salt,” said Susan Dudley, the administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs under President George W. Bush.

Trying to Claim the Deregulation Crown, Inaccurately

In October, Mr. Trump boasted that under his administration, “we have stopped or eliminated more regulations in the last eight months than any president has done during an entire term. It’s not even close.”

Mr. Trump later compared the deregulatory actions in his first year in office to all of those taken during the full “four years, eight years, or, in one instance, 16 years” in all previous presidential administrations.

No American president has served for 16 years; Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected to four presidential terms but only served for 12 years before dying in office.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Beyond that, comparing regulatory activity across administrations is an imperfect exercise. Standards for making and revoking rules are frequently changing, and courts and Congress can tweak and review them as well. But available metrics indicate that Mr. Trump is wrong to claim he has already stopped or eliminated more federal rules than any other president.

The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs says it withdrew 635 rules in 2017 — a fast pace over a one-year period by any measure. But that is not more than any previous presidency — Mr. Obama withdrew 1,814 federal rules during his eight-year term and Mr. Bush eliminated 2,813 while in office.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Program for Economic Research on Regulation, at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., combs the Federal Register to quantify the number of rule-making actions by regulatory agencies. University researchers found that federal regulations actually grew by about 0.65 percent during Mr. Trump’s first year in office. They also noted that the rate of growth was slower than what it was annually from 1970 to 2016, when it averaged about 2.1 percent.

Experts said that Mr. Trump’s efforts to cut through the bureaucracy fall far short of the structural changes made under Ronald Reagan, who abolished entire regulatory agencies and eliminated some economic regulations in the transportation, telecommunications and energy industries. “Nothing Trump has done to date compares to that in terms of impact on Americans,” Ms. Dudley said.

Cary Coglianese, the director of the Penn Program on Regulation at the University of Pennsylvania, agreed that “a lot of the key institutions’ processes that we have today, dealing with regulation, were established by Reagan.” He pointed to the 1981 enactment of cost-benefit analyses and legal challenges to Mr. Reagan’s deregulation policies that set current standards for administrative law, which govern how federal, state and local agencies operate.

Deregulatory Successes and a Word of Caution

Mr. Trump’s hyperbole not withstanding, he can claim some deregulatory successes.

Previous reports in The New York Times have detailed the Trump administration’s lax enforcement of certain rules across several agencies. Early in his administration, Mr. Trump rolled back Obama-era rules though an unprecedented use of the 1996 Congressional Review Act, which allows Congress to “disapprove” regulations issued within 90 days with the help of the president.

Dan Goldbeck of the American Action Forum, a nonprofit conservative group that promotes smaller government, said he sees a more concerted effort to streamline and trim back regulations under Mr. Trump than under many previous administrations.

The pace of consideration for significant regulations also has slowed. The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs reviewed 60 rules that were described as economically significant between Jan. 21, 2017, to Jan. 20, 2018. The last time so few federal rules were reviewed in one-year was 1984, under Mr. Reagan.

Regulations, Going Forward

The federal regulatory system will continue to evolve throughout — and beyond — Mr. Trump’s time in office. So will his own approach, experts said.

So far in the 2018 fiscal year, the administration has shifted its deregulation efforts toward making substantive changes through the regular rule-making process, Mr. Goldbeck said. As evidence, he pointed to a new rule to amend the federal meat inspection process that the Department of Agriculture estimates could save millions of dollars annually, according to a department estimate. “But expect to see a delay” in how much fruit these efforts will bear Mr. Goldbeck said. “That’s just nature of the process.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And Mr. Trump has reversed at least one of his own decisions, backtracking on his waiver to regulate state government drug-testing rules.

Additionally, there is no guarantee that regulations that have been waived will survive legal challenges, nor that they will remain in place in future presidential administrations. Once agencies complete the rule-making process, Ms. Dudley said, “they will likely have to defend their deregulatory action in court, where they may or may not succeed.” Congress also could later decide to reverse Mr. Trump’s actions.

“Regulatory change is not forever. They’re not like diamonds,” Mr. Coglianese said.